John Cassian was probably a 'Scythian', born in Dobruja which
today is part of Rumania. He was equally conversant with Latin and
Greek and was an important link uniting the Eastern and Western
parts of the Christian world. When still very young he became a
monk in Palestine and soon gave himself to xeniteia, the spiritual
wandering of one who is 'a stranger and pilgrim on earth'. About
3 8 5 he went to Egypt, where he spent around fifteen years visiting
monasteries and hermitages. About 400 he arrived in Constantinople
and became a disciple of St John Chrysostom who ordained him
deacon. When John Chrysostom was persecuted by the imperial
power, he charged Cassian with the task of taking to Rome the
protest of the clergy who remained faithful to him. At Rome, where
he came to know Leo the Great, Cassian was ordained priest. In
4 r 5 he was called to Provence as a witness to monasticism. At
Marseilles he founded two monasteries, St Victor's for men and
St Saviour's for women. In 4 1 7, for the bishop of Apt, he drew
up his Cenobitic Institutions, in which he describes the Egyptian
communities from which the bishop wanted to draw inspiration for
his own foundations. Cassian then wrote, for the bishop of Frejus
and particularly for Honoratus the abbot of Lerins and subsequently
bishop of Aries, his very important Conferences.
Cassian considerably modified St Augustine's most cherished
theses on freedom and grace. In particular he transmitted to the West,
with great discernment, the experience of Egyptian and Palestinian
monasticism and the best of the spirituality of Origen and Evagrius.
He put forward a wise combination of community life and the life
of a solitary. He put ascesis at the service of love. His mysticism
is a mysticism of light and of the divine light pervading the whole
person, including the subconscious mind. The praying of the psalms,
meditation, the repetition of a short formula to still the intellect, all
this culminates and is surpassed in the 'prayer of fire', which is a true
sharing in the eternal nativity of the Son.
It was essentially through St John Cassian that continuity was
achieved between the original monasticism, particularly that of Egypt,
and the monasticism of the West. The Rule of St Benedict quotes

Biographical Notes

353

Cassian at length, and his Conferences have been read every evening
from generation to generation in Western monasteries.
Conferences SC 4 2, 54, 64

jOHN CLIMACUS (7th century)
John of Sinai came to be called 'of t!-ie Ladder' (klimakos in Greek)
from the name of his principal work. It seems that he lived at the
end of the sixth century and in the first half of the seventh. He gave
systematic form to three centuries of monastic tradition in an ascetic
synthesis resembling the doctrinal synthesis elaborated in the same
period by Maximus the Confessor. In both cases it was a decisive
transition from the patristic to the properly Byzantine period.
After having received a sound education John, at the age of
sixteen, entered the monastery of Mount Sinai where he put himself
under the instruction of an 'elder' Abba Martyrios. He became a
monk at the age of twenty. After the death of his teacher he made a
lengthy trial of anachoresis (life as a solitary) interrupted presumably
by a journey to Egypt, where he visited the tragic 'monastery of the
penitents' of which he speaks in The Ladder. This solitude made him
a recognized spiritual master. He was then elected superior of the
monastery of Sinai. As a very old man, this new Moses wrote The
Ladder of Divine Ascent at the request of the superior of a neigh­
bouring monastery, John of Raithu, who later was to write his life.
The Ladder is made up of thirty short treatises (logoi) subse­
quently called 'steps'. Each of them is a group of sayings or narratives
of which the discontinuity, as the rigorous poetic and enigmatic
style, is an encouragement to meditation. First of all the break with
the world is described in all its unavoidable violence. Then follow the
basic attitudes of purification: obedience, repentance, 'mindfulness of
death', penthos (spiritual mourning, with the gift of tears). They make
possible the fight against the passions, those forms of idolatry: anger,
resentment, idle or lying talk, discouragement, gluttony, impurity,
avarice, insensibility, sloth, vainglory, pride, blasphemous thoughts.
They also make possible the corresponding virtues and this corre­
spondence denotes a metamorphosis: for example, gentleness, silence,
chastity, detachment from possessions, vigilance. Praxis culminates in
simplicity, humility and discernment. The last four logoi are devoted
to union with God: hesychia ( peace, silence, contentment), pure
prayer, impassibility (a sign of resurrection), and love.

354

Biographical Notes

Climacus insists on a permanent correspondence between metanoia
(repentance) and illumination, similar to the union of the human
and divine in Christ. Metanoia, in the ontological sense, denotes an
awareness of our separation from God. Ascesis in this perspective
rehabilitates the body by rescuing it from the manifold forms of
death. St John Climacus attaches great importance to invocation of
the Name of Jesus 'in the rhythm of the breathing'.
This work of his, at once very traditional and very personal,
continually brings one back to fundamentals and by its irony masks
any monastic presumptions or reliance on mechanical techniques. It
marks out a path that leads through the imitation of Christ who has
died and is risen to resemblance to God and participation in him, in
fact to the burning bush, to the mystery of Sinai.
The Ladder of Divine Ascent PG 88 ( revised 1 8 8 3 , 1 970). There are
two English translations: by Archimandrite Lazarus Moore, London
1 9 59; by Colm Luibheid and Norman Russell, SPCK London 1 9 8 2.

jOHN OF DAMASCUS or jOHN DAMASCENE (c. 6 5 0 - C. 750)

St John Damascene gave systematic form, with power and clarity,
to the theology and the ascetic teaching of the Fathers, and particu­
larly to the 'energetic' post-Chalcedonian Christo logy, in its origins
Alexandrian . But his intervention in the controversy over icons led
him at the same time to emphasize, like the older Antiochenes,
the actual individuality of Christ. It is obviously an important
synthesis.
John was a Christian Arab, in a Near East recently conquered
by Islam ( his name was Mansur, the same as that of his grandfather
who had signed the surrender of Damascus to the Muslims) . It
was a situation of dhimma, a tolerated and controlled a utonomy
that none the less enabled John to oppose, without any risk to
himself, the Caesaro-Papist pretensions of the iconoclastic Emperors
of Byzantium. Born at Damascus about 6 5 0, bilingual, he became
responsible for local finances, the Caliph having kept the organiz­
ation of the Byzantine state and retained the Christian families who
made it work. This high official, the defender of his co-religionists,
was also a learned theologian. He regarded Islam as a Christian
heresy and did not hesitate, in a Muslim society, to assume the
defence of sacred images, and to compose Trinitarian hymns. It

Biographical Notes

355