This heresy (the word is derived from mane physis, single nature) as­
serts that there is in Christ a single nature only, obviously 'composite',
divine-human but with a preponderance of the divine, an absorption
of the human into the divine, so that Christ's humanity seems pure
transparency without any solidity of its own. Monophysitism devel­
oped chiefly in Egypt and Syria, and often in mitigated forms, it
was principally a pretext for asserting the autonomy of those re­
gions over against the Romano-Byzantine domination. More deeply,
however, one can discern in monophysitism the temptation to a
closed 'divinizing', a re-emergence of the extra-biblical spiritualities
of the East, as Vladimir Soloviev correctly observed in his book
La Grande Controversie (Paris 1 9 5 3 p. 70 1 ) . The basic intention
of Monophysitism in its origins in Alexandria is to celebrate the
transfiguration of all things in Christ. That is true eschatologically, 'in
mystery', (and in 'the mysteries', the Church's sacraments) . Secretly,
the world is already the 'burning bush', everything is in God through
Christ's deified flesh, a 'glass torch'. But this sacramental indicative
requires an imperative in the ascetic, ethical and historical field. What
is offered to us in Christ, in the 'mysteries', we have to realize in our
freedom, in the 'newness' of the Spirit. Whereas Monophysitism,
which is irresponsible, quietistic, almost magical, is interested only
in transfiguration, and that immediately. History is done away with
or disqualified. Ecclesial experience becomes a pietistic immersion in
the divine. Hence the formulae that made their appearance in extreme
Monophysite circles, describing the absorption of human nature in
the divine nature as a drop of honey in the limitless sea. (We are
not far here from the salt doll that had to be dissolved in the ocean
of the godhead, according to an Indian fable. ) Others maintained
that the Word was 'condensed' into flesh, as water solidifies into
ice. They always use these images of condensation and fusion (so
important also in Origenism) which rob of all meaning both creation
ex nihi/o and the new creation made by the incarnation of the Word.
Emanation takes the place of creation, so that the salvation of the
world is only its reabsorption into the divine.
The human destiny was at stake there, j ust as much as in the
Arian crisis. This was particularly so in those mitigated forms of
Monophysitism that the Emperors of the seventh century favoured
in order to consolidate their hold on the Near East that was threat­
ened by the Persians, and later by Islam. These mitigated forms
were monoenergism a single energy or operation in Christ - and
-

380

Theological Notes

especially monothelitism a single will in Christ, the divine will ab­
sorbing his human will. If Christianity had become Monophysite or
Monothelite, the human dimension of history, humanity's tragic and
creative freedom and the reality proper to the created being would
have had difficulty in asserting themselves and converting them­
selves into Christian humanism, a 'divine-human reality'. Christianity
would have forgotten the Semitic sense of the body and of history that
were defended in their own way by the great exegetes of Antioch,
not without the risk of falling into the opposite error. It would
have forgotten Job's protest, and the wrestling with the 'angel',
and that admirable balance of the human and divine will in Christ
'without confusion or separation', as defined in 4 5 1 by the Council
of Chalcedon and in 6 8 1 by the Second Council of Constantinople.
-