The Incarnation was therefore the product of a long history,
a fleshly fruit that had long been ripening on the earth. This was
the point of view of Irenreus of Lyons who in the second century
worked out a real theology of history expressed as a grand suc­
cession of covenants (with Adam, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and so
on). Whilst humanity thus tested its freedom, an ever-diminishing
'remnant' medita ted on and refined its expectations until a woman,
Mary, by giving her indispensable assent, at last made possible
the perfect union of the divine and the human. The history con­
tinues today; Life continues to be offered, not imposed. Today also,
amidst the titanic undertakings of the modern age, people have
desired 'to see even before becoming adult the d isappearance
of every difference between God and h umanity'. The movement
from the God-man to' God-humanity is now possible only because
of the patience of the saints, who have slowly established their
commumon.
People who will not wait for maturity are utterly unreasonable
. . . In their ignorance of God and of themselves these insatiable and
ungrateful wretches would like . . . to see, even before becoming
adult, the disappearance of every difference between the uncreated
God and humanity which has only just been created . . . First of
all creation had to appear. Only later did the mortal have to
be vanquished and swallowed up in immortality, and humanity

The God-Man

41

be fully conformed to the image and likeness of God, having
freely discovered good and evil.
IRENI'EUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV, 3 8,4 (SC 1 00 bis,
pp. 9 5 6-8)
So we can see the Nativity as a secret re-creation, by which
human nature was assumed and restored to its original state. From
then on all things were tending towards the predetermined end, which
was already present in the heart of history like a seed of fire. Christ
reveals to us, and we see in Christ, that perfect 'image of God'
after which we are fashioned, and which attracts us like a magnet.
It is now up to us to transform 'image' into 'likeness'. The next
quotation from Gregory Nazianzen concludes with a picture of the
crib, where on either side of the incarnate Logos stand the alogoi
animals, that is, beasts which do not have the power of speech nor
any understanding of its meaning. The entire universe, Origen said, is
a logos alogos, a meaning not uttered, and therefore locked in absurd­
ity. The Logos, the Meaning, is fully revealed by the incarnation.
I too will proclaim the greatness of this day: the immaterial becomes
incarnate, the Word is made flesh, the invisible makes itself seen,
the intangible can be touched, the timeless has a beginning, the
Son of God becomes the Son of Man, Jesus Christ, always the
same, yesterday, today and for ever . . . This is the solemnity we
are celebrating today: the arrival of God among us, so that we might
go to God, or more precisely, return to him. So that stripping off
the old humanity we might put on the new; and as in Adam we
were dead, so in Christ we might be made alive, be born with him,
rise again with him . . . A miracle, not of creation, but rather of
re-creation . . . For this feast is my perfecting, my returning to my
former state, to the original Adam . . . Revere the nativity which
releases you from the chains of evil. Honour this tiny Bethlehem
which restores Paradise to you. Venerate this crib; because of it
you who were deprived of meaning {logos) are fed by the divine
Meaning, the divine Logos himself.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 3 8, For Christmas (PG 3 6,664-5)
We cannot celebrate the birth of the Word made flesh without
glorifying Mary the 'Mother of God'. The Syriac hymn which follows
heaps up paradoxes in accordance with the 'apophatic antinomy'

42

Understanding the Mysteries

which we have just described. Here it is the antinomy between God
the Creator and a tiny baby.
Blessed is she: she has received the Spirit who made her immaculate.
She has become the temple in which dwells the Son of the heights
of heaven . . .
Blessed is she: through her the race of Adam has been restored, and
those who had deserted the Father's house have been brought
back . . .
Blessed is she: within the bounds of her body was contained the
Boundless One who fills the heavens, which cannot contain
him.
Blessed is she: in giving our life to the common Ancestor, the Father
of Adam, she renewed fallen creatures.
Blessed is she: she gave her womb to him who lets loose the waves
of the sea.
Blessed is she: she has born the mighty giant who sustains the world,
she has embraced him and covered him with kisses.
Blessed is she: she has raised up for the prisoners a deliverer who
overcame their gaoler.
Blessed is she: her lips have touched him whose blazing made
angels of fire recoil.
Blessed is she: she has fed with her milk him who gives life to the
whole world.
Blessed is she: for to her Son the saints all owe their happiness.
Blessed be the Holy One of God who has sprung from thee.
jAMES OF SARUG Hymn to the Mother of God (Bickell, I p. 24 6)
The virginity of the Mother of God does not deny eros but
sets it free. It has always been recognized, from the ancient myths
down to Freud himself, that love and death, eros and thanatos, are
inseparable. In Mary's virginal motherhood, her fruitful virginity,
we see transcendence intervening to snatch love out of the hands of
death, and so fulfilling in embryo the expectation of humanity and
of the cosmos, and setting in motion the universal transfiguration.
We are born to die. Jesus is born to live a life without shadow and
without limit, and to communicate this life to others. If he suffers and
dies he does it willingly, in order to change death, in whatever shape
it comes, into an approach to life. Gregory Nazianzen shows us the
God-made-flesh assuming in a practical way all the weaknesses of our
finite condition: temptation, hunger, thirst, fatigue, supplication,

The God-Man

43