Dionysius relates the vision of a holy man whose indignation
which he considered righteous had led him to pray for the damnation
of a blasphemer, and for one of the faithful whom he had expelled
from the Church. Carpus's vision convinces him that to wish to damn
anyone is to attack Christ himself, to annul his Passion and so to
compel him to undergo it again; similarly it is to throw oneself, by
one's own action, into the abyss.
One day I was in Crete. The holy man Carpus welcomed me to his
home. If there exists anyone predisposed to contemplation by the
purity of his mind, it is he . . . yet he told me that one day he was
exasperated by the infidelity of a man. The cause of his bitterness
was that this infidel had turned away from faith in God one of the
members of his church, at a time when he was still celebrating the
solemnity of his baptism. Carpus in his goodness should have been
duty bound to pray for both of them . . . to try tirelessly to regain
them until the day when their objections had been cleared up
. . . Instead, Carpus for the first time in his life felt grieved and
indignant. It was in this state of mind that he went to bed and fell
asleep. In the middle of the night, at the hour when he was in the
habit of waking of his own accord to sing the praises of God, he
arose, still prey to unspiritual irritation, saying to himself that it
was not right to let someone live . . . and he begged God to hurl
his inexorable thunderbolt to put an end at a single stroke to the
life of two unbelievers. At that moment, he said, the house where

The Difficult Love

301

he was suddenly seemed to rock this way and that, then to split in
two from the roof down the middle. A vivid flame appeared which
came down on him; the sky was rent; Jesus revealed himself in the
midst of a multitude of angels . . .
Carpus lifted his eyes and stood astonished at what he saw.
Looking down, he told me, he watched the ground itself opening
to make a black yawning abyss, and in front of him on the
edge of the abyss the two men he had cursed, trembling and
gradually losing their foothold. From the bottom of the abyss he
saw snakes crawling up and wrapping themselves round the men's
feet trying their utmost to drag them down. The men seemed to
be on the point of succumbing, partly despite themselves, partly
quite willingly, since they were being assaulted and at same time
seduced by the Evil One. Carpus was overjoyed, he told me, as
he contemplated the spectacle beneath him. Forgetting the vi­
sion above, he was growing impatient and indignant that the
unbelievers had not yet succumbed. Several times he joined his
efforts to those of the snakes . . .
In the end he lifted his eyes and saw again in the sky the
same vision as shortly before. But this time Jesus, moved with
compassion, came down to the unbelievers and stretched out a
hand to help them . . . then he said to Carpus, 'Your hand is
already raised. It is I whom you should strike, for here I am to
suffer again for the salvation of humanity . . . moreover you should
consider whether you yourself should not stay in the abyss with the
snakes, rather than live with God . . .
That was Carpus' story, and I believe it.
'

DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Letter 8, To Demophilus (PG 3 ,
1 097- 1 00)

Certainly the Church has rejected Origen's theory that finally,
after going through a multitude of spiritual states, all human beings
and even the fallen angels would be reconciled and restored to their
original condition. Such a conviction actually conflicts with Christ's
warnings so emphatically formulated in the synoptic Gospels. It also
belittles the irreducible nature of our freedom. To admit with Origen
that evil will come to an end by exhaustion, whereas God alone is
infinite and therefore alone able to satisfy the inexhaustible desires
of human nature, is to forget the absolute character that belongs to
personal freedom precisely because it is in the image of God.
That said, it remains spiritually impossible to talk of hell for
others. The theme of hell can only be broached in the language of

302

Approaches to Contemplation

I and Thou. The threats in the Gospel concern me; they form the
serious tragic element in my spiritual destiny; they prompt me to
humility and repentance, because I recognize them as the diagnosis
of my state. But for you, the numberless you of my neighbour, I can
only serve, bear witness, and pray that you will experience the Risen
Christ, and that you and everyone will be saved.
In My Missions in Siberia, a book published in 1 9 1 7, the archi­
mandrite Spiridon quotes the words of a peasant, the 'holy man
Simeon': ' For me, sufferings are not an object of fear. What does
make me afraid is that God might deprive sinners of his grace . . . I
am ready to pray to God not only for all Christians but also for those
who have not been baptized. On all of them I have such pity! . . .
on those who have been hanged and on those who have committed
suicide . . . on all who have died I take pity, and finally even on
the devil I take pity. That is what I feel in my heart, 0 servant of
God. Whether it is right or not I do not know. But my heart is like
that. St Isaac of Nineveh used to pray 'even for serpents', 'even for
demons' (Ascetic Treatises, 8 1 ).
St Anthony had prayed to the Lord to be shown to whom he was
equal. God had given him to understand that he had not yet reached
the level of a certain cobbler in Alexandria. Anthony left the desert,
went to the cobbler and asked him how he lived. His answer was
that he gave a third of his income to the Church, another third to
the poor, and kept the rest for himself. This did not seem a task
out of the ordinary to Anthony who himself had given up all his
possessions and lived in the desert in total poverty. So that was not
where the other man's superiority lay. Anthony said to him, 'It is the
Lord who has sent me to see how you live.' The humble tradesman,
who venerated Anthony, then told him his soul's secret: 'I do not do
anything special. Only, as I work I look at all the passers-by and
say, 'So that they may be saved, I, only I, will perish.'
Quoted by the staretz Silvanus (in Archimandrite Sophrony, Staretz
Silouane (i.e. Silvanus), Paris Sisteron 1973, p. 203 ).

Abba Poimen said, 'As far as I am concerned, I reckon I have been
thrown into the place where Satan has been thrown.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Poimen, 184 (SO

1,

p. 252)

These astonishing words of Abba Poimen are a prelude to what
Christ was to say in our century to staretz Silvanus of Mount Athas:
'Keep your spirit in hell and despair not.'

The Difficult Love

303