However, we are continually tempted to appropriate the world,
to take possession of it as a kind of prey. We thus increasingly
enslave it to death, and today we are in danger simultaneously
of collectively committing suicide, and destroying nature. But by
the intervention of the mystery of Christ and of the witness of his
followers a state of death is transformed into a state of resurrection.
In Christ the world becomes Eucharist. In him we can transfigure the
world by integrating it into the human consciousness of the Risen
Christ, who offers resurrection to everyone and everything. It is up
to Christians to show people that the cross, all the crosses of history,
call upon us to advance from possession to sharing and offering,
to discover the Giver through the gift. They invite us to respect
nature and spiritualize it, and to share the blessings of the earth like
brothers and sisters, because, as Dumitru Staniloae, whose thought
is summarized here, writes, 'They are destined to serve interpersonal
communion' (Dogmatic Theology, 1,344). Sanctity imparts the divine
light not only to our bodies but to the whole cosmic environment.
Today, when history itself is raising the ultimate questions, we are
called to what Simone Wei) termed a 'holiness of genius' that rs
able to communicate the light to the very foundations of culture.
Two passages from contemporary writers underline the reality of
a similar form of contemplation. Pierre Emmanuel in L 'Arbre et
le vent shows the need to experience the depth of the universe
in order to awaken the depth in oneself. He continues: 'In the
countryside this dimension is everywhere to be seen: in the plain
extending all the way to Ventoux; in the distance to the evening
star at dusk; in the trunk of the majestic umbrella pine; in the
flight of the kestrel; in the hooting of the owl at night. These
objects that are at once visible and invisible exist as much as I
do, and more so, each in its own order . . . They are all symbolic
- even the scorpion that I am careful not to squash and which I
like to see basking on the wall. Man's true measure is in these
objects. It consists in making their true nature his own, taking
part in their praise, hearing it in them, merging it into himself.'
And Vladimir Maximov in Les Sept ]ours de Ia creation: 'Mi­
raculously . . . it was if I were seeing the forest for the first time. A
fir tree was not only a fir but also something else much greater. The

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

229

dew on the grass was not j ust dew in general. Each drop existed on
its own. I could have given a name to every puddle on the road.'
Thus the person of prayer, the person for whom knowledge
stands for life and life for immortality, becomes capable of 'feeling
everything in God'. He can feel on every object, in every object, the
blessing of God. Thereby he is able to bless everything and to see
in everything a miracle of God. By so seeing he is able, without
seeking to do so, to work the miracle of materiality restored to
health, weightless, splendid, belonging to the new Jerusalem.
What is knowledge? - The feeling of eternal life.
And what is eternal life? - Feeling everything in God.
For love comes from meeting him. Knowledge united to God
fulfils every desire. And for the heart that receives it, it is altogether
sweetness overflowing on to the earth. For there is nothing like the
sweetness of God.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 8 (p. 1 64)

3

Enstasy - Ecstasy

r . Into the Unknown

In the battle of ascesis and the offering of creatures to God in the
cosmic liturgy, our will must cooperate with divine grace. But the
ultimate knowledge, the love-knowledge of the Trinity, takes hold
of us by grace alone. We prepare for it by a stripping away of our
being until we become nothing but expectation. In Simone Weil's
admittedly approximate expression, we must 'de-create' ourselves,
and descend even below the level of plants and stones, to those
luminous deep waters on which the Spirit breathes: to the waters
of baptism, the waters of creation. Then the Spirit comes as he came
upon Mary and the person is created afresh in 'an ineffable peace and
silence'.
It is in the power of our spirit to gain the spiritual understanding
of objects. But to understand the Holy Trinity is not only not in
the power of our spirit but it requires a superabundant grace from
God.
EVAGRIUS OF PONTUS Centuries, !, 7 9 ( Frankenberg, p. 3 5 5 )

To progress in thinking about creatures is painful and wearisome.
The · contemplation of the Holy Trinity is ineffable peace and
silence.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Centuries, I,65 (Frankenberg, p. I05)

Certainly, as we have seen, God, can be known by way of every
reality. And to know him is to be taken into the perichoresis, the

Enstasy - Ecstasy

231

Trinity's continuous movement of love, which sends us back to
creatures. Yet the soul aspires to direct unity with him so that 'nothing
may interpose itself between the soul and God' as St Augustine
said. And he is witness to such an uninterrupted meeting - so
intense that in his thought the cosmos loses all importance. The
true knowledge of God appears then as an unknowing, because it
takes place beyond the frontiers of any human capacity to under­
stand or rationalize, and because it is communion with Another
whose otherness remains irreducible. The person, going beyond the
borders of the intellect, meets the living God who a lso, in his love,
'goes out' of himself, leaves his inaccessible transcendence. By this
interweaving, in Christ, of the two 'ecstasies', the uncreated light
sets the soul ablaze and draws it into the depths of the Trinity.
The unknowing is not simply negative theology: it is a soaring of
the personality towards that personal God who was led by love
to assume the condition of a slave and to die on a cross. To get
a proper sense of this mystery of Christ we need the remarkable
apophatic algebra of the Areopagite.
God is known both in all objects and outside all objects. God
is known both through knowing and through unknowing . . .
He is nothing of what is, and therefore cannot be known through
anything that is; and yet he is all in all. He is nothing in anything;
and yet he is known by all in all, at the same time as he is not
known by anything in anything.
It is no mistake then to speak of God and to honour him as
known through all being . . . But the way of knowing God that is
most worthy of him is to know him through unknowing, in a union
that rises above all intellect. The intellect is first detached from all
beings, then it goes out of itself and is united to rays more luminous
than light itself. Thanks to these rays it shines in the unfathomable
depths of Wisdom. It is no less true, however, as I have said, that
this Wisdom can be known from every reality.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, VII, 3 (PG 3 ,872)

Augustine understood the experience of the Eastern en-stasis in
the form Plotinus gave it, and he converted it into an encounter
with the absolute Thou, as is emphasized by the well-known sentence
of the Confessions: ' But Thou, Lord, wast more within me than my
inmost being, and higher than what is highest in me' ( Tu autem,
Domine, eras interior intima meo et superior summa meo). God is

232

Approaches to Contemplation