process of reflection on power is quickly developing that disparages
Christianity by concentrating solely on the authoritarian aspects
of 'Christian society', such as were inaugurated by Constantine.
That is to forget the phenomena of the confessing Church, the
uncompromising prophetic testimony of the monks, the endurance
of the great witnesses to the faith such as St Athanasius of Alexandria,
so many proofs that the tension between the kingdom of Caesar
and the kingdom of God, a space for the freedom of the spirit, has
never been able to be relaxed.
To illuminate and complete the dogma of Nicaea, an immense
labour of deep theological and spiritual study was carried out by
Athanasius himself and, subsequently, by the great bishops who came
from Cappadocia, a region of Asia Minor that had long ago been
Hellenized. These are the Cappadocian Fathers, Basil of Ca:sarea,
called 'The Great', his younger brother Gregory of Nyssa, and his
friend Gregory Nazianzen. The interpretation of the homoousion ran
two opposite risks: either of exaggerating the divine unity, depriv­
ing the hypostases of their individual existences and going back to
the previous errors of Sabellius (c. 26o) in whose teaching, called
'Sabellianism', the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit were regarded
as three successive manifestations of the godhead, three 'masks' of
God; or, at the other extreme, of separating the divine Persons to
the point of approaching tritheism, as if there were 'three Gods'.
Athanasius and the Cappadocians gave precise form to the mystery
of the living God who is Love, by establishing clearly the antinomy of
the unity and the difference: the living God is a single Essence ( Ousia)
in three Persons (Hypostases). The Essence designates the infinite
unity of the divine Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. Each of
the Persons is neither a substance nor a fragment of the whole, but a
way of giving and receiving unity, a 'mode of existence' of the unity.
The absolute is identified with Love. The Father, the 'principle' of the
godhead, supposes another, his own other, the Son, who is within
him and equal to him in infinity; for Love cannot exist alone.
'Thou, Father, art in me and I in thee', Jesus said. But there arises
simultaneously a Third, the Spirit, and here the Three, according to
St Basil in his Treatise on the Holy Spirit, does not signify a number
(we are dealing here, he says, with 'meta-mathematics'), rather an
infinity that transcends, in the open unity of Love, opposition and
confusion equally, so that the love of one for the other is itself a
mysterious Person, since nothing can be impersonal in God. Only the
Three in One, in an uninterrupted interchange, each one unique and
at the same time containing the other two without confusing them,
·

Theological Notes

377

represents the fullness of being, in communion. The communion also
reveals itself as the source of being.
At the Second Ecumenical Council that met in Constantinople
in 3 8 1 the Nicene Creed was completed in terms that proclaim the
divinity of the Spirit: 'I believe . . . in the Holy Spirit, the Lord,
the Giver of Life, who proceeds from the Father, who with the
Father and the Son is worshipped and glorified, who spoke by the
prophets.' In addition the Fathers of the Council - all of them from
the Eastern Church - in 3 82 sent to the bishops of the Western
Church assembled in Rome a synodical letter in which the an­
tinomy of the one Essence and the three Persons was clearly recalled:
'The Word of Truth . . . teaches us to believe in the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit in such a way as to confess a single
divinity, power and essence of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit
. . . in three perfect Hypostases or in three perfect Persons.'
Early Monasticism

When in the fourth century, with the conversion of the Emperors, the
Church ran the risk of too close an accommodation with the secular
world, the tension towards the Kingdom 'that is not of this world'
was safeguarded by the monastic movement. At the moment when
martyrdom seems to have come to an end, the monk internalizes it
by ascesis: 'Give your blood and receive the Spirit'. Disregarding the
age-old seductions of eros and power the anchorite (the word literally
means one who withdraws) demonstrates the irreducible character of
the human being as image of God. Seeking the personal God who
delivers him from all the conditionings of this world, he truly becomes
a person and thereby, visibly or invisibly, every one's 'neighbour'.
Monasticism is first of all the reassertion of a need of the human
condition in a Christian manner. Monastic life has, in fact, existed in all
religions. For 'traditional' societies, the community and the cosmos
survive through the openness to the divine of some 'who renounce'.
The monk is an explorer of the interior spaces. Whether he is a wise
man or a fool, his very existence causes virgin energy to spring forth
from the depths. By standing outside the secular world (and the
secular world is only made possible by his doing so), he is in league
with the angels and the animals, with children and with the old; at
once old man and child, he gives birth to himself for eternity.
At the same time Christian monasticism has antecedents that
are properly biblical. It spiritually internalizes and expresses afresh

378

Theological Notes

externally the Exodus of the Hebrew people through the desert
towards the Promised Land. The mystery of monasticism coincides
therefore with the mystery of the desert, a place of extremes where
nothing can bring salvation but the intervention of the transcendent.
The desert is a symbol of death-resurrection. It is there that the divine
Bridegroom draws his faithless bride in order to 'speak to her heart'
( Hosea 2. I 6). It is there that God reveals himself to Elijah in a 'still
small voice' (I Kings 19. 1 2) . The desert is also the site of the great
fast of the ' Forty Days' ending with the ' Day of Meeting', the Forty
Years of the Exodus, the Forty Days of Moses on Sinai and Elijah on
Horeb - these are taken up again by Christ when the Spirit drives him
into the desert to confront temptation, constituting already a
descent into hell and a paschal dawn. The Church in its turn
is in danger of settling down, of becoming insipid, and it is
imperative that some of its children should return to the desert
and, in Christ, should there become, with him, conquerors over
the powers of nothingness and so be prophets of the Kingdom.
Already here below, coming forth in paschal fashion from the
death into which he chose to descend, the monk becomes aware of
his resurrection in the Risen Christ. The Spirit brings to birth in
him the glorified body. 'The whole body is transformed and comes
under the power of the Holy Spirit, and something I reckon is already
granted to it of that spiritual body it will become at the resurrection
of the righteous' (Anthony the Great, Letter 1 ,4). By transfiguration
the monk becomes the priest of the world, and the world regains
around him its original lucidity and meaning. Miracle reveals this
metamorphosis, something that at times rises above the fallen nature
of time, space and matter. But it is not miracle that counts for the
Christian monk, but love. The monk by making himself wholly
one again (the original meaning, it seems, of the word monachos
is 'unified') is open to the fullness of the Trinity and discovers his own
ontological unity with all human beings. He carries in his prayers the
whole of humanity. His very presence is protection and peace for the
world. In the Sayings ofthe Desert Fathers the principal spiritual gifts
of the perfect monk are rhema kai dynamis, the 'word' that discerns
spirits and the 'power' that heals. This is the very atmosphere of the
Gospel, and crowds flock to the monk who has become capable of
the love that liberates, j ust as they flocked to Christ.

379

Theological Notes
Monophysitism