The divine essence, the godhead, 'God', does not exist otherwise
than in the Persons. The source of the godhead, the sole origin of the
Son and of the Spirit is the Father. The early Church hardly ever
spoke of 'God' in general, a God in whom the Persons could then be
distinguished. It spoke of the Father, for 'the name Father is greater
even than that of God'. The ocean of the divine essence springs from
the fathomless depths of a Person, the Father. Yet through Christ
we can, in the Holy Spirit, call him Abba, the word of trust and
tenderness by which a small child calls his father. So the apophatic
antinomy is also the paradox of the Father as Origin in unfathomed
depths, and the Father as Abba, 'Daddy'.
In practice, the fact that the Father is the 'origin' of the Trinity
does not imply any superiority or domination for his own advantage.
As Christ will 'empty himself ' on the cross, so the Father 'empties
himself' for the benefit of the Son, to whom he gives all that he has
and all that he is - the fullness of the divine unity - and on whom
he causes his Spirit to rest, the Spirit by whom they love each other
and find joy together. 'Spiritual fatherhood' after the likeness of the
divine Fatherhood is sacrificial and liberating; it imparts the spirit of
life and liberty. Dostoyevsky, in The Brothers Karamazov, has shown
how spiritual fatherhood like this is the only answer to the dialectic of
'master' and 'slave', and to fatherhood in its degenerate form, which
sons experience as tyranny and rivalry.
The following passages should be read in the light of this refusal
of any 'subordinationism'. Irenreus of Lyons speaks of the Son and the
Spirit as 'hands of God' (the God, par excellence, for the first Chris­
tians, is the Father) . Dionysius depicts them as the shoots and flowers
of the 'engendering' godhead. Gregory Nazianzen emphasizes that it
is the Father who makes the Trinity a living unity: we cannot speak of
the divine 'nature' or 'essence' except within the Three, within their
communion which comes from the Father and returns to him.

God: Unity and Difference

69

As if God had no hands of his own! From all eternity he has with
him the Word and Wisdom, the Son and the Spirit. It is by them
and in them that he does all things.
IRENIEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,2o,1 (SC 1 00 his, p. 626)
The Father represents in the bosom of the deity the element of
generation, Jesus and the Spirit are after a fashion the divine shoots
of God's engendering deity, and as it were its superessential flowers
and radiance.
0 JONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names II, 7 -8 (PG 3 , 6 4 5 )

The single nature of the Three is God. I n regard to his oneness he
is the Father. The others come from him and return to him without
being confused with one another. They coexist with him, without
being separated in time, in purpose, or in power.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 42 (PG 3 6,4 7 6)

In a text already quoted Dionysius has reminded us that the
godhead is not spirit or sonship or fatherhood in the sense in which
we usually use these words. He goes on to explain that we must
learn to reason from the opposite direction. It is not a question of
thinking about the Trinity, but in it, starting from the Trinity as the
unshakeable foundation of all Christian thought.
Divine fatherhood and sonship are suggested to us by the gift of
that basic fatherhood and sonship, the gift by which spiritual beings
in conforming to God receive their being and the name of gods,
sons of gods, and fathers of gods.
0J ONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, 11,8 ( PG 3 , 64 5 )

In particular the divine mystery transcends the distinction
between masculine and feminine. It integrates the symbolism of
both at the same time. The Bible repeatedly bears witness to
God's maternal tenderness; it speaks of his 'bowels of mercy', that
is rachamim in the visceral sense. St John mentions the ' Father's
bosom'. God is therefore at once father and mother, and the Odes
of Solomon call the Son and the Spirit the two breasts that feed us
with the milk of immortality.
By his mysterious divinity God is Father. But the tender love he

70

Understanding the Mysteries

has for us makes him become a mother. The Father in loving makes
himself feminine.
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA Can a Rich Man be Saved? 3 7 (PG
9,642)

Nevertheless, the ultimate predominance of fatherly symbolism
indicates communion without confusion. The ultimate predominance
of motherly symbolism (as is often the case in India) would indicate a
confusion that obliterated the person.
At Pentecost the Father gives the Spirit 'in the name of the Son'.
And the Spirit is the 'Spirit of the Son', the 'Spirit of Christ'. The
Christian West has insisted on this basic truth. It has contemplated
the 'movement' of the divine 'consubstantiality', the movement of
love in the Trinity, going from Father to Son, then from Father and
Son to the Holy Spirit who imparts it to us. However, St Augustine
says that if the Spirit comes from the Son as well as the Father, (in
Latin Filioque) he comes principaliter from the Father who remains
the sole origin of the other divine Persons.
The Christian East, some of whose formulations - particularly
those of the Alexandrian Fathers - are fairly similar to those we have
considered, also stressed the giving of the Word by the Spirit. It was
by the Spirit that the Word became flesh, it is by the Spirit that he
makes himself present to the Church. Thus the relationship of the
Son and the Spirit is seen to be one of mutual service. The Spirit
comes from the Father in the Son and manifests him. The Son is
born of the Father in the Spirit and is manifested by the Spirit. And
both reveal the Father. In the Church the same reciprocity and the
same mutual service must exist between the priesthood, which bears
witness to the sacramental presence of Christ, and prophecy, which
reveals the freedom of each conscience in the Holy Spirit.
Christ's existence is an existence in the Holy Spirit whose pur­
pose is the 'pneumatization' of all flesh.
The coming of Christ? The Spirit precedes it. Christ's presence in
the flesh? The Spirit is inseparable from it. Miracles and gifts of
healing? It is the Spirit who bestows them. Demons driven out? In
the Spirit of God . . . Sins forgiven? In the grace of the Spirit, for
'you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God' ( I
Corinthians 6. I I ). Union with God? The Spirit effects it, since

God: Unity and Difference

71

'God has sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying "Abba!
Father! '" (Galatians 4.6). The resurrection of the dead? It is brought
about by the Spirit, for 'when thou sendest forth thy Spirit, they are
created; and thou renewest the face of the earth' (Psalm ro4.30).
BASIL OF CiESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 19 (PG 3 2, 1 57)