standing at the right hand of God; and he said, " Behold, I see the
heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of
God" . . . Then they cast him out of the city and they stoned him; . . .
And as they were stoning Stephen, he prayed, " Lord Jesus, receive my
spirit." And he knelt down and cried with a loud voice, " Lord, do
not hold this sin against them. " And when he said this, he fell asleep'
( Acts 7· 5 5-60). Vision of glory . . . prayer for the executioners . . .
when history comes full circle and another witness is put to death,
this very death 'opens the heavens' and allows the energies of love
to make their entry into the world.
Martyrdom was the first form of sanctity to be venerated in
the Church. And when there were no longer any martyrs in blood,
martyrs in ascesis, monks, came instead. It was the monks who
coined the saying that expresses the meaning of martyrdom: 'Give
your blood and receive the Spirit.' Then martyrdom returned.
A martyr can be, at first sight, any man or woman at all. But
when they are crushed by the suffering they are identified with
the Crucified Christ, and the power of the resurrection takes hold
of them. In very direct accounts composed at the time without
embellishments, at the beginning of the third century, we see a
young Christian woman in prison lamenting the birth of her child
(if a pregnant woman was arrested she was not sent to execution till
after the birth). The gaoler jeers at her. But Felicity gently explains
to him that in the moment of her martyrdom another will suffer in
her. Her friend Perpetua in fact feels nothing when she is exposed
to the wild bulls. She is momentarily spared before coming out of
the 'ecstasy of the Spirit', as if awakening from a deep sleep. And the
martyrs, before meeting death together, give one another the kiss of
peace, as during the eucharistic liturgy.
For the authentic Christian, death does not exist. He casts himself
into the risen Christ. In him death is a celebration of life.
Felicity was eight months pregnant when she was arrested . . . Her
labour pains came upon her . . . She was suffering a great deal
and groaning. One of the gaolers said to her, 'If you are already
crying out like this, what will you do when you are thrown to
the wild beasts? . . .' Felicity answered him, 'Then there will be
another within me who will suffer for me because it is on his
account that I am suffering . . .'
Perpetua was tossed in the air first [by a furious bull]. She fell
on her back. As soon as she could sit up . . . she pinned back her
hair which had come loose. A martyr cannot die with disshevelled

Enstasy - Ecstasy

25 9

hair, lest she seem to be in mourning on the day of her glory. Then
she got up and noticed Felicity who seemed to have collapsed. She
went to her, gave her her hand and helped her to her feet. When they
saw both of them standing up, the cruelty of the crowd was sub­
dued. The martyrs were taken out through the gate of the living.
There Perpetua was welcomed by a catechumen, Rusticus, who
was very much attached to her. She seemed to awake out of a
deep sleep, so long had the ecstasy lasted. She looked around
her and asked, 'When shall we be delivered to the bull ?' When
she was told it had already taken place she could not believe it,
and refused to accept the evidence until she saw on her dress
and on her body the traces of the ordeal. Then she called her
brother and the catechumen. She said to them, 'Remain steadfast
in the faith. Love one another. Do not let our sufferings be a
subject of scandal for you . . . '
The people demanded that the wounded be brought back into
the arena so that they could enjoy the spectacle of the sword
piercing the living bodies . . . The martyrs . . . came to the place
that the crowd wanted. They gave one another the kiss of peace to
consummate their martyrdom, in accordance with the rite of faith.
All of them remained motionless to receive the fatal blow.
Martyrdom of Felicity and Perpetua, in the year 203 , at Carthage
(Knopf-Kriiger, p. 3 5 -44 )

The blood of the martyrs is identified with that of Golgotha,
and so with that of the Eucharist, which imparts the inebriation
of eternity. The martyr becomes Eucharist, becomes Christ. And
that is why the relics of the martyrs, regarded as fragments of the
glorified cosmos, of the 'world to come', are enshrined in the altars
on which the Eucharist is celebrated.
blessed martyrs, human grapes of God's vineyard, your wine
inebriates the Church . . . When saints made themselves ready for
the banquet of suffering they drank the draught pressed out on
Golgotha and thus they penetrated into the mysteries of God's
house. And so we sing, 'Praise be to Christ who inebriates the
martyrs with the blood from his side.'
0

RABU LAS OF EDESSA Hymn to the Martyrs (Bickell II, p. 262)

In the following passage from the letter written by Ignatius of
Antioch to the Christians of Rome - the bishop of Antioch was being
led to the capital of the Empire for solemn execution, at the beginning

260

Approaches to Contemplation

of the second century - almost all the aspects of this 'death-and­
reurrection' are brought together. The martyr crushed by the teeth
of wild animals, like grains of wheat in the mill, becomes eucharistic
matter; he shares fully in Christ's divinizing flesh; he reproduces,
in a quasi-liturgical sense, the Passion of the Crucified, in order to
put on the Glorified, and to feel his victorious power. Victor, the
conqueror, was the name given to every martyr. In Christ the Spirit
is, for Ignatius, a stream of living water that leads to the Father.
Here the body of death is no longer dissolved by ascesis and
spiritual experience, but all at once by human violence. The martyr
hastens the coming to birth of the glorious body.
I am writing to all the Christians to tell all of them that I am gladly
going to die for God . . . Let me be the food of beasts thanks to
which I shall be able to find God. I am God's wheat and I am being
ground by the teeth of wild beasts in order to become Christ's pure
bread . . . By suffering I shall be a freedman of jesus Christ and I
shall be born again in him, free . . . let no being, visible or invisible,
prevent me out of jealousy from finding Christ. Let fire and cross,
wild animals, torture, disclocation of my bones, mutilation of my
limbs, the grinding to pieces of my whole body, the worst assaults
of the devil fall on me, provided only that I find Jesus Christ . . .
My new birth is close at hand. Forgive me, brethren, do not hinder
me from living. Let me come into the pure light. When I reach that
point I shall be a man. Allow me to reproduce the passion of my
God. May anyone who has God in him understand what I desire
and take pity on me, knowing what it is that straitens me . . . My
earthly desires have been crucified. There is no longer in me any
fire to love material objects, only living water that murmurs within
me, 'Come to the Father' . . . It is the bread of God that I desire,
which is the flesh of jesus Christ . . . and for drink I desire his
blood, which is imperishable love.
IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH To the Romans, 4-7 (SC 10, p. 1 3 0-7)