RUFINUS OF AQUILEIA
He is one of the men who made the main works of Greek exegesis
and theology known to the Latin world.
Born into a Christian family near Aquileia, Rufinus studied at
Rome where he formed a friendship with Jerome, whose career
impinged on his own. He withdrew for some years to Aquileia
into a monastic community where Jerome also stayed for a short
time. The vocation of this peaceful and conciliatory man was to
prayer and study. It was at Aquileia that he received baptism. Back
in Rome he became the protege of a rich patrician lady, Melania
the Old. Both went together to Egypt to visit the great Abbas in
its celebrated deserts. Rufinus who was fluent in Greek studied for
six years at Alexandria, under the direction of Didymus the Blind.
Didymus introduced him to Greek theology and imbued him with
his own fervent admiration for Origen. In 3 77 Rufinus settled in
Jerusalem, in the monastery founded by Melania on the Mount of
Olives. As Jerome was pursuing a similar course and had settled at
Bethlehem they resumed their friendly relations. But not for long.
A traditionalist hunter-out of heresies, Epiphanius of Salamis, ques­
tioned Origen's orthodoxy. Rufinus defended him, while Jerome with
a complete volte-face attacked him. In 397 Rufinus returned to Italy
and translated Origen's On Principles, modifying or omitting the
risky passages which he believed (it seems) had been added by enemies
of the master. In his Preface he mentions the admiration that Jerome
had long professed for Origen. Jerome, angered, published a complete
translation of the same book to bring out its heretical character.
Pamphlets were exchanged, utter confusion reigned, and it became
incumbent on Rufinus to justify his position, with difficulty, before
Pope Anastasius. In disgust he withdrew from the controversy and
settled in silence at Aquileia where he undertook an enormous series
of translations. He was aware that knowledge of Greek was dying out
in the West, and he wanted to transmit to the Latin world texts that
seemed fundamental to him, the exegetical works of Origen, the trea­
tises of the great Cappadocians, witnesses to monastic spirituality.
Many works lost in the original are known to us now only through

368

Biographical Notes

Rufinus' translations. It was the right moment. The Visigoths invaded
Italy. Rufinus, caught up in the general exodus, fled southwards, and
died at Messina in 4 1 0 at the time that Rome was being sacked.
History of the Monks in Egypt PL 2 1 ,3 8 7 - 462: either Rufinus'

original work or the adaptation of a Greek narrative. Some young
monks visit Egyptian Abbas, about 3 9 5. Cf. The Lives of the Desert
Fathers, translated by N. Russell, London, 1 9 8 1 .

Sayings (Apophthegms) of the Desert Fathers

This is an anonymous collection of 'words' and 'works' of the great
solitaries of Egyptian desert, the first Abbas ( Fathers) . There is no
doubt that they are based on a coptic oral tradition, and that, in
the fifth and sixth centuries, this was translated into Greek, with
the names arranged in alphabetical order, from Abba Anthony to
Abba Or (whose name begins with omega, the lasdetter in the Greek
alphabet).
There is not yet a critical edition in SC; in the meantime, the
Greek collections of the apophthegms are scattered, PG 6 5 , 7 1 -440;
Revue de /'Orient chretien, years 1 907, 1 908, 1 9 1 2 & 1 9 1 3 ; PO
8 , 1 64- 1 8 3 . A sixth century Latin translation from the Greek is
extant, but it does not correspond exactly to the Greek collec­
tions: Verba Seniorum PL 73-4.
SYNESIUS OF CYRENE (c.3 70 - 4 1 3/4 1 4 )
In an age when disagreement and antitheses were more i n evidence,
Synesius unexpectedly and probably prematurely, expounded the
virtues of synthesis. He was eager for the interior life but also for
literature and for political involvement. He was a Platonist, but one
who, in complete continuity through a deepening of his spirituality,
became a sincere Christian. Though he was a Christian, he always
remained faithful to Hypatia whom an Alexandrian mob, stirred to
fanaticism by some clerics, were to slaughter, without any protest
from Cyril the Archbishop. Synesius was a bishop who demanded
to remain married at a time when treatises on virginity were being
multiplied.
Synesius was born at Cyrene in Libya and studied at Alexandria

Biographical Notes

369

where Hypatia introduced him to Neoplatonism and the sciences.
He remained in correspondence with her throughout his life. A
country gentleman, keen on hunting and literature in both of
which he excelled, he accepted political responsibilities and became
a member of the provincial council. From 3 99 to 402 he stayed at
Constantinople and successfully negotiated financial concessions for
his province - and of course for himself. (It is common knowledge that
the burden of taxation had become crushing under the Late Empire. )
Synesius delivered, courageously, a speech On Kingship before the
young Emperor Arcadius, in which he painted a Platonic portrait of
the ideal prince, and protested in the name of his class against the
proliferation of barbarians in imperial administration. On his return
he married a Christian wife at Alexandria, and resumed in Cyrenaica
his life as a gentleman farmer. But when in 405 the imperial troops
abandoned the frontier, he organized a local militia and repulsed the
nomads. In 4 1 0 the clergy and the faithful of Ptolemais elected him
bishop. He was taken aback and stated frankly to the patriarch certain
philosophical objections, but the six months that elapsed before his
consecration enabled him to think more deeply: 'not a collapse of
philosophy but a fresh step forward in it.' He obtained the right to
remain married, which was traditionally permissible but less and less
usual under the influence of the monastic movement. He declared
that he loved his wife and wanted more children. He was an excellent
bishop, struggling against the Arians, against inj ustices and abuses in
administration. He was a man of peace.
Hymns 5 PG 6 6, 1 5 87-1 6 1 6
TERTULLIAN (c. 1 5 5 - c.2 2 5 )

The first o f the great Latin-speaking theologians a n d moralists.
Tertullian was born at Carthage into a pagan family. He studied
law and rhetoric at Rome where he made a reputation for himself as
a lawyer. Impressed by the witness of the martyrs, he was converted
about 1 9 3 . He settled at Carthage in the service of the Christian
community. It is not certain whether he was a priest. In that great city
where all the currents of the 'new religions' met and mingled, where
Christianity itself was still fluid, Tertullian attempted to delineate
its features more precisely in opposition to pagans, Jews, heretics
amd Gnostics. But his own tendency to extremes led him about
207 to espouse Montanism, a charismatic movement that claimed

3 70

Biographical Notes