Among the great Cappadocians he was the keenest metaphysician,
the most profound mystic, and also the most conscious of the nature
of suffering.
Gregory was born at Caesarea in Cappadocia and was two
years younger than his brother St Basil. He was introduced to the
spiritual life by their sister Macrina, who after the death of their
father converted the household into a sort of monastery on one of
their estates.
Gregory studied only in Cappadocia, but he mastered ancient
philosophy and radically transformed its concepts, both Stoic and
Platonic, in the crucible of revelation. He became an orator, and mar足
ried Theosevia, a woman of great culture and strong faith, but that
did not prevent him from becoming bishop of Nyssa in 3 7 1 at the
compelling request of Basil. Basil was fortifying himself against
the imperial power by multiplying the episcopal sees within his
metropolitan j urisdiction and entrusting them to men on whom he
could rely. In the same year, at the request of Macrina, he wrote an
encomium on virginity in which he developed the theme of interior
chastity as the unification of the whole being in the likeness of the
love of the Trinity. The passion of love in paradise took forms that
we cannot imagine. Sexuality, which at once expresses that love and
misrepresents it, was created by God in view of the fall. This theme
was to pass, in a more radical form, into Syriac spirituality (see St
Ephraim of Syria). Theosevia died about 3 8 5 , 'a true saint and the
true wife of a priest', as a neighbouring bishop said.
Gregory was given to speculation and mysticism and had diffi足
culty in adapting himself to his episcopal duties. Indeed his problems
as an administrator, already deplored by Basil, enabled the Arians to
have him deposed and exiled in 376. Two years later the death of the
Emperor Valens, who supported Arianism, made it possible for him to
return to his city where the people welcomed him ecstatically. After
the death of Basil in 3 79, Gregory asserted himself and engaged in
polemic against the rationalism of Eunomius and the monophysite
tendencies of Apollinaris. He shared in the triumph of the Council in
3 8 I . He played an important part at court as long as the new Emperor
Theodosius resided at Constantinople. When Theodosius departed
for Milan in 3 8 6, Gregory withdrew into the country and devoted
himself to monastic spirituality (Homilies on the Song of Songs; Life
of Moses; perhaps also On the Christian Way of Life), as if he wanted
to give mystical content to the communities organized by Basil.

338

Biographical Notes

Gregory broke up and 'allegorized' Greek concepts to put them
at the service of mystery. Against Eunomius, who claimed that reason
can cope with all that is real, he declared the unlimited character and
therefore the unknowability of the divine essence, and the mystery
present in the humblest objects. But that essence is not impersonal; it
is love and a love that knows suffering, which leads the inaccessible
God to become the 'suffering God'. His 'unlimited character' derives
precisely from the fact that the Person cannot be made an object and
from the infinite unity of the divine Persons.
Humanity is in the image of God, and therefore as undefinable
as God is, beyond all knowledge and all power that might claim
to explain or condition it. The likeness is expressed in freedom,
an ability given to the person to transcend his nature in the act
of communion. In the image of a God who is not a monad but
a Trinity there is a 'single person' in a multiplicity of persons,
an original unity broken by the fall and restored in Christ. Each
individual accordingly bears in himself the whole of the human
race. As the perceptible world exists only in the encounter of the
divine with the human consciousness, several more or less 'miracu足
lous' degrees of materiality may appear, according to a person's
openness to God or otherwise. In Christ's humanity the world is
transfigured, and this seed of resurrection is communicated to us by
the 'mysteries' of the Church.
The spiritual life consists in purifying in oneself the image
of God so that it should become a faithful mirror, according
to a likeness-sharing. It consists of three stages: the ethical, the
transformation of the passions, of which the biblical equivalent
is found in the Book of Proverbs; the physical, when the sensible
world is rejected as an illusion and reinterpreted symbolically as
a manifestation of God (Ecclesiastes); and the metaphysical, in
which the soul expands in the divine sphere (the Song of Songs).
The knowledge of God is an unknowing in which the person
soars above and beyond the perceptible and the intelligible. It is
a rhythm of enstasis and ecstasis, of light and darkness, in which
the more the soul is filled with the divine presence, the more it
reaches out towards the Other that is always beyond its reach.
Participation increases desire; God is the more unknown the more
he is known; humanity advances from marvelling to marvelling,
in a dynamism in which otherness is never separation nor unity
confusion. The same thing happens in our relationship with our
neighbour, in the fullness of the 'single person'. The metaphysics
of communion is indeed remarkable.

Biographical Notes

339

In the history of human thought Gregory appears as the one who
broke the cycles of ancient thought (still traceable in Origenism) , who
rehabilitated becoming, who gave time a positive value as the
apprenticeship of love, and supremely the one who showed that
human beings have no other definition than to be undefinable,
because they are made by God's infinitude and created for it.
Dialogue with Macrina on the Soul and the Resurrection PG 4 6, I I 足
I 6o; On the Creation of Man PG 44, I 2 5 - 2 5 6, Life of Moses SC I
bis; On Love of the Poor PG 46,454-469; Homilies on the Song
of Songs PG 44,7 5 5- I 1 2o; Against Eunomius PG 4 5 , 2 3 7- I I 22,
Catechetical Oration PG 4 5 ,9; Against Apollinaris PG 4 5 , I I 2 3 - I 2 70.

Recent critical edition of Greek text of all works by W. Jaeger.

HERMAS (The Shepherd of Hermas) ( 2nd century)

An apocryphal apocalypse, written by an unknown author in the
second century, doubtless in Roman circles making use perhaps of
earlier documents, marked by Judaizing tendencies, in the Essene
tradition ( the theme of the 'two ways') . The angel regarded as having
imparted this revelation is a shepherd: hence its title. This is a text
affording important information on ecclesiology and the sensitivity
of the first Christian communities. The Church, pre-existent in the
divine mind, was created before all things and constitutes the mystical
foundation of the universe and of history. It is symbolized, now by a
woman who is both old and young, now by a tower in construction,
made of living stones, founded on the rock of Christ, surrounded by
the water of baptism. When it is completed, the end will come. The
human being must choose between the two ways, between the two
angels (of righteousness and evil), between the 'evil spirits' and the
'holy spirits' that are the 'dynameis of the Son of God'. The root
of sin is therefore dipsychia, compromise, ambivalence, duplicity.
Consequently metanoia, the turning back by the spirit, repentance,
is indispensable - it is not certain whether the Shepherd envisages an
ecclesiastical penance that would be possible only once after baptism.
A Christian is characterized by the simplicity of his harmonized being,
by spontaneous joy, and a deep-seated cheerfulness. Here the frescoes
of the catacombs come to mind.
Critical Text SC 53 bis

340

Biographical Notes

HESYCHIUS OF BATOS or SINAI