His love for me brought low his greatness.
He made himself like me so that I might receive him.
He made himself like me so that I might be clothed in him.
I had no fear when I saw him,
for he is mercy for me.
He took my nature so that I might understand him,
my face so that I should not turn away from him.
Odes of Solomon 7 (The Odes and Psalms of Solomon
Harris and A. Mingana II, pp. 240- 1 )

R.

The p urpose o f the incarnation i s t o establish full communion
between God and h umanity so that in Christ humanity may find
adoption and immortality, often called 'deification' by the Fathers:
not by emptying h uman nature but by fulfilling it in the divine life,
since only in God is human nature truly itself.
How could the human race go to God if God had not come to us?
How should we free ourselves from our birth into death if we had
not been born again according to faith by a new birth generously
given by God, thanks to that which came about from the Virgin's
womb?
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,3 3,4 (SC 100 bis, pp.
8 10-1 2)

This is the reason why the Word of God was made flesh, and
the Son of God became Son of Man: so that we might enter into
communion with the Word of God, and by receiving adoption might
become Sons of God. Indeed we should not be able to share in
immortality without a close union with the Immortal. How could

Understanding the Mysteries

38

we have united ourselves with immortality if immortality had not
become what we are, in such a way that we should be absorbed
by it, and thus we should be adopted as Sons of God?
lRENIEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III,I9,1 (SC 2 1 1, p. 3 74)

In Jesus, however, the mystery is at the same time disclosed
and veiled. Because the inaccessible God reveals himself in the
Crucified, he is by that very fact a hidden and incomprehen­
sible God, who upsets our definitions and expectations. The true
'apophatic' approach (apophasis means the 'leap' towards the mys­
tery) does not rest solely, as is often thought, in negative theology.
That has only the purpose of opening us to an encounter, a
revelation, and it is this very revelation, in which glory is in­
separable from kenosis, which is strictly unthinkable. The apophasis
therefore lies in the antinomy, the sharp distinction in character
between the Depth and the Cross, the inaccessible God and the
Man of Sorrows, the almost 'crazy' manifestations of God's love for
humanity, and a humble and unobtrusive plea for our own love.
He was sent not only to be recognized but also to remain hidden.
0RIGEN Against Celsus, 2,67 (PG 1 1,90 1 )

By the love of Christ for us . . . the Superessential gave up his
mystery, and manifested himself by assuming humanity. However,
in spite of this manifestation - or rather, to use a more divine
language, at the very heart of it - he loses nothing of his mysteri­
ousness. For the mystery of Jesus has remained hidden. No reason
and no intelligence have fathomed his essential nature. In whatever
way he is understood, he remains utterly mysterious.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Letter 3, To Gaius (PG 3 , I o69)

The incarnation is 'a mystery even more inconceivable than any
other. By taking flesh God makes himself understood only by
appe·a ring still more incomprehensible. He remains hidden . . . even
in this disclosure. Even when manifest he is always the stranger'.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 91,1048-9)

The Incarnation needs to be put back into the whole scheme
of creation. Human waywardness has certainly transformed it into

The God-Man

39

a tragic 'redemption', but the Incarnation remains above all the
fulfilment of God's original plan, the great synthesis, in Christ,
of the human, the divine and the cosmic. 'In him all things were
created, in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible . . . all things
were created through him and for him. He is before all things, and
in him all things hold together' (Colossians I . I 6- 1 7).
Christ is the great hidden mystery, the blessed goal, the purpose
for which everything was created . . . With his gaze fixed on this
goal God called things into existence. He [Christ] is the point
to which Providence is tending, together with everything in its
keeping, and at which creatures accomplish their return to God.
He is the mystery which surrounds all ages . . . In fact it is for
the sake of Christ, and for his mystery, that all ages exist and all
that they contain. In Christ they have received their principle and
their purpose. This synthesis was predetermined at the beginning:
a synthesis of the limit and the unlimited, of the measure and the
immeasurable, of the bounded and the boundless, of the Creator
and the creature, of rest and movement. In the fullness of time
this synthesis became visible in Christ, and God's plans were
fulfilled.
MAxiMUS THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, 6o (PG 90,
6 1 2)

Everything in effect exists in an immense movement of incarna­
tion which tends towards Christ and is fulfilled in him.
That God should have clothed himself with our nature is a
fact that should not seem strange or extravagant to minds that
do not form too paltry an idea of reality. Who, looking at the
universe, would be so feeble-minded as not to believe that God
is all in all; that he clothes himself with the universe, and at the
same time contains it and dwells in it? What exists depends on Him
who exists, and nothing can exist except in the bosom of Him who
IS.

If then all is in him and he is in all, why blush for the faith
that teaches us that one day God was born in the human condition,
God who still today exists in humanity?
Indeed, if the presence of God in us does not take the same
form now as it did then, we can at least agree in recognizing that
he is in us today no less than he was then. Today, he is involved

40

Understanding the Mysteries

with us in as much as he maintains creation in existence. Then,
he mingled himself with our being to deify it by contact with
him, after he had snatched it from death . . . For his resurrec­
tion becomes for mortals the promise of their return to immortal
life.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Catechetical Orations, 25 (PG 4 5 ,65-8)

Therefore the mystery of the Incarnation of the Word contains in
itself the whole meaning of the riddles and symbols of Scripture,
the whole significance of visible and invisible creatures. Whoever
knows the mystery of the cross and the tomb knows the meaning
of things. Whoever is intitiated into the hidden meaning of the
resurrection knows the purpose for which God created everything
in the beginning.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 I , I J 6o)