to be his successor. He read Philo and Plotinus, and also the Greek
Fathers of his own century, Athanasius, the Cappadocians, and Cyril
of Jerusalem; and he received much, though not without exercising
the requisite discernment, from the spiritual exegesis of Alexandria,
that of Origen and Didymus. His spirituality is deeply ecclesial, as is
shown by the two studies that he consecrated to the 'mysteries'. The
marriage of the soul to Christ takes place within that between Christ
and his Church; the Church is 'virgin in her sacraments, mother of her
people'. Like the Greek Fathers, under the influence of the contempo­
rary monastic movement, he valued spiritual virginity very highly, but
he is able to speak of ascesis with delicacy, humanity, and evangelical
freedom and moderation. He is concerned with the formation of
clerics able to teach the laity elementary practical wisdom. Poet and
composer, he is the true creator of hymn-singing in the Latin Church,
singing that allowed all the people to join in the celebration.
On the Sacraments SC 25 bis; On Penance SC 1 79; On Virginity PL
1 6,272; Commentary on Psalm n8 PL 1 5, 1 224; On Elijah and
Fasting PL 1 4,698

ANTHONY THE GREAT ( 2 5 1 - 3 5 6)
The most celebrated of the first monks. His life, written by Athanasius
of Alexandria who knew him personally, shows his spiritual journey
to be the synthesis and the model of monasticism's essential qualities.
He was born near Memphis in Egypt into an already Christian family
of well-to-do farmers and he was profoundly affected at the age of
eighteen by the Gospel injunction that he heard read in Church: ' If
you would be perfect, go, sell what you possess and give to the poor
. . . and follow me' (Matthew 19.21).
So he distributed all his possessions and established himself near
his village in a hut, under the direction of an experienced 'elder'. His
life was interwoven with prayer nourished on Holy Scripture, with
a sober ascesis, with fasts and sleeping rough, and manual work to
help the poor. This was an almost cenobitic stage (a community life
of sorts). Later he retired, all alone, to the Egyptian desert, finding
shelter in a tomb dug out of the rock, then barricading himself into a
disused fort. This was the anchorite stage (withdrawal into solitude)
in which he confronted, in Christ, death and the demoniacal powers
that haunt our unconscious, all of them things of which the desert
appeared to be the site and the symbol. Thus he passed through the

Biographical Notes

311

trial o f spiritual abandonment and a long experience of death and
resurrection, of descent into hell and of Easter. At the end of twenty
years he emerged from his solitude totally imbued with the light and
the peace and the strength of the Holy Spirit. From then on he
exercised a far-reaching spiritual fatherhood by the 'word of life' and
by 'power' (namely, discernment, prophecy, and healing). He died at
the age of I 05 , 'his face radiant with joy', on I? January 3 5 6.
The Life of Saint Anthony by St Athanasius is in PG 26,8 3 5-976
APosToLic CoNSTITuTioNs: RuLEs o F THE APo sTLES

The Apostolic Constitutions are an enormous canonical and liturgical
composition attributed to the Apostles but probably worked out in
Syria a bout the end of the fourth century. Inserted in it, with modi­
fications, are the Didascalia, likewise said to be 'of the Apostles' and
composed in Syria at the beginning of the third century, the Didache,
and in the eighth book the Apostolic Tradition of Hippolytus of
Rome, containing the oldest text of the liturgy known to us.
The 8 5 Rules of the Apostles, concerned with the clergy and
the organization of the Church, are found at the end of the Apos­
tolic Constitutions, whose provisions they summarize. These also
were drawn up about the end of the fourth century in the form of
conciliar rules, often like those of the Councils of Antioch ( 3 4 I ) and
Laodicea ( between 343 and 3 8 1 ).
The text is found in E.X. Funk, Didascalia et Constitutiones Aposto­
lorum, val. I , Paderborn I 90 5 .
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA ( 29 5 - 3 7 3 )

Formed not by the apprenticeship of ancient literature a nd philoso­
phy but by the Christian milieu in the period of the persecutions,
this Egyptian who spoke and wrote Coptic as well as Greek was
the unremitting defender of the Church's independence from the
Empire. He became a Christian but he was continually tempted to
support Arianism (see separate Note) which denied the divinity of
Christ. Athanasius, then a deacon, accompanied his bishop to the
Council of Nicaea which in 3 2 5 proclaimed Christ homoousios, that
is, 'consubstantial', in essence identical with the Father, the 'source'

312

Biographical Notes

of the Godhead. In 3 28 he became archbishop of Alexandria and
all Egypt. Confronted by the Arian reaction he made himself the
staunch defender of the homoousion and received the unreserved
help of his people and of the monastic movement that was then
developing in Egypt. For Athanasius, to say that Christ is fully
God is to make possible the deification of humanity. ('What is
not assumed is not saved.') All his thought revolves around the
bold assertion: 'God became man in order that man might become
God.' In Christ all humanity is 'worded' (in the Logos) and human
beings become capable of receiving the Spirit . . . As the Arians relied
on those texts of the Old Testament which might suggest that the
Wisdom of God was something created, Athanasius developed a
whole 'sophiology' (from sophia, wisdom) to show the connection of
the Logos, uncreated Wisdom, with created wisdom, the revelation
of the divine activity in creatures and the whole cosmos.
Athanasius's attitude of resistance earned him two periods of
exile in the West (at Trier 33 5-3 3 7; at Rome and Aquileia 3 3 9-346)
where he busied himself in consolidating the dogma of Nicaea. From
the fifties when the tension became too great he 'went underground'
of his own accord in the Egyptian desert with some monks ( 3 5 63 6 1 and 3 62-3 6 3 ) and especially with St Anthony whose Life he
was to write. His work opened the way to the triumph of the
homoousion, the foundation of the Christian concept of the person.
In his Twelfth Provincial Letter Pascal wrote, referring to Athanasius:
'All the efforts of violence to weaken the truth serve only to make
it stand out the more clearly'.
Letters to Serapion on the Holy Spirit PG 26, 5 29-676; On the Incar­
nation and Against the Arians SC 1 99; On Virginity PG 28, 2 5 1-282

AuGUSTINE OF H IPPO ( 3 5 4 - 430)
Augustine is the Father of the Church who more than any other has
influenced the Church in the West, for better or for worse, and it
is important today to reinsert his voice into the patristic symphony
from which his work was isolated by the barbarian invasions.
His seeking, his suffering, the stages of his conversion have
been admirably recounted in his Confessions and are astonishingly
modern. Augustine was born at Thagaste (the modern Souk-Akhras
in Algeria) into one of those families of small landowners who were
oppressed by taxation yet made a point of giving their children

Biographical Notes

313