The Most High has wounded me with his Spirit,
filled me with his love,
and his wounding has become my salvation . . .
All the earth is like a memorial to thee,
a presence of thy works . . .
Glory to thee, 0 God,
thou who art for ever the delight of Paradise.
Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, I I (Harris-Mingana, II, p. 266)

The book of the cosmos (the world, St Augustine says, is a
'first Bible') and that of the Scriptures match each other, since
they have the same author. Both of them find their full revelation
in Christ who, after writing them, made them his body and his
face. The incarnate Logos frees the speechless tongue of creation
and unites it with the world as logos alogos. Christ has become
the direct divine-human subject of the cosmic logoi. He confers
on them their deepest meaning, their paschal nature, the power
of the resurrection to work in them. He reveals their roots in the
abyss of the three-Personed God.
Origen, within the limits of the knowledge of his time, looks at
creation with amazement and admiration. He sees its infinite com­
plexity, brought into harmony by syntheses which are increasingly
complex and rich. Dionysius the Areopagite celebrated the 'sympa­
thy' that holds all creation together and transforms its contradictions
into living tensions. Here is the Trinitarian fabric once again. Every
creature, however lowly in itself, yet expresses an infinite intelligence.
Humanity must be united with every creature in order to make the
praise of its tongue-tied nature to be heard. For 'prayer like a sigh
has always resided in the mystery and essential nature of creation'
(Basil Rozanov, The Apocalypse of our Time). The person of prayer
understands that 'everything is praying, every creature is singing the
glory of God.' 'I learned thus,' the ' Russian Pilgrim' adds, 'what the
Philokalia calls "the knowledge of the language of creation" and I
saw how it is possible to converse with God's creatures.'
In what a wonderful way the tremendous discoveries of Western
science - undoubtedly made possible and mysteriously made fruitful

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

217

by this contemplative gaze - permit u s today to widen the scope of
this celebration!
The divine art that is manifested in the structure of the world is
not only to be seen in the sun, the moon and the stars; it operates
also on earth on a reduced scale. The hand of the Lord has not
neglected the bodies of the smallest animals - and still less their
souls - because each one of them is seen to possess some feature
that is personal to it, for instance, the way it protects itself. Nor
has the hand of the Lord neglected the plants of the earth, each
of which has some detail bearing the mark of the divine art,
whether it be the roots, the leaves, the fruits or the variety of
species. In the same way, in books written under the influence
of divine inspiration, Providence imparts to the human race a
wisdom that is more than human, sowing in each letter some
saving truth in so far as that letter can convey it, marking out
thus the path of wisdom. For once it has been granted that the
Scriptures have God himself for their author, we must necessarily
believe that the person who is asking questions of nature and the
person who is asking questions of the Scriptures are bound to
arrive at the same conclusions.
0RIGEN Commentary on Psalm r ,3 (PG r 2.,108 r )

The Word both hides and reveals himself in visible forms as much
as in the words of Scripture. The visible is the invisible written down.
The divine idea, the logos, which produces, develops and attracts to
itself every creature, is both silent and self-revelatory in it. It is silent
in the negligence and greed of humanity. It is self-revelatory when
humanity 'names' living things, like a poet on fire with love. Matter
is infra-visible, the interplay of energies, a mathematical a bstraction;
form bears witness to the invisible.
In the Scriptures we say the words are the clothes of Christ and
their meaning is his body. The words veil, the meaning reveals. It
is the same in the world where the forms of visible things are like
the clothing, and the ideas according to which they were created
are like the flesh. The former conceal, the latter reveal. For the
universal creator and law-maker, the Word, both hides himself in
his self-revelation and reveals himself in his hiding of himself.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua, (PG 9 I , I I 2.9)

218

Approaches to Contemplation

'Lift up your eyes, and see how the fields are already white for
harvest' (John 4·3 5 ). The Word is in the midst of his disciples. He
is asking his hearers to lift up their eyes toward the fields of the
Scriptures and toward that other field where the Word is present
in every creature, however small, so that they may perceive the
whiteness and the brilliant radiance of the light of Truth which
is everywhere.
0RIGEN Commentary on St John's Gospel, 1 3 ,42 (GCS 4,269)

The nature of matter is good. In reality, since matter is an
abstraction, it is the fruitful flesh in which the Spirit is incarnate.
The material nature of 'materials', in the sense the artist-craftsman
gives to the word, is an incarnation. By means of form it partici­
pates in the order, the beauty, the realm of the Good-and-Beautiful
where God can be discerned.
It is just as false to repeat the commonplace that it is in matter
as such that evil resides. For to speak truly, matter itself also
participates in the order, the beauty, the form . . . How, if it were
not so, could Good be produced from something evil? How could
that thing be evil when it is impregnated with good? . . . If matter is
evil how can one explain its ability to engender and nourish nature?
Evil as such engenders and nourishes nothing. It does not produce
or preserve anything. If it be objected that matter . . . leads souls
towards evil, how could that be true when many material creatures
turn their gaze towards the Good?
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, IV,28 (PG 3 ,792)

And so every creature is a gift of the invisible, a palpable
mystery.
When someone whose mind is but partially developed sees some­
thing clothed in some semblance of beauty, he believes that
this thing is beautiful in its own nature . . . but someone who
has purified the eyes of his soul and is trained to see beautiful
things . . . makes use of the visible as a springboard to rise to the
contemplation of the spiritual.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On Virginity, (PG 46,364)

The ancient Greeks, to symbolize a true meeting, used to use a
split ring whose two separate halves were joined together again. In

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

219