God is the producer and generator of tenderness and eros. He has
set outside himself what was within himself, namely, creatures.
Which is why it is said of him: God is Love. The Song of Songs
calls him agape, or 'sensual pleasure', and 'desire', which means
eros. In so far as the eros desire originates from him, he can be
said to be the moving force of it, since he generated it. But in so
far as he is himself the true object of the love, he is the moving
force in others who look to him and possess according to their
own nature the capacity for desire.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR On the Divine Names, IV,4 (PG 4,296)

Hence the conclusion of Climacus:

Quest, Encounter, and Decision

23

Blessed is the person whose desire for God has become like the
lover's passion for the beloved.
j o HN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 3 oth step, 5 ( u )l,
p. 1 6 8 .

Even more than hunger, thirst, which can so torment someone
in the desert, expresses the desire for God.
And what thirst there is today!
Hunger makes itself felt only gradually and vaguely, but the
raging of intense thirst is unmistakable and intolerable. No wonder
the person who longs for God cries, 'My soul thirsts for God,
for the living God' (Psalm 42.2).
j o HN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 3 oth step, 9 ( 1 5 ) ,
p. 168.

That is the mysterious dialectic of faith, hope and charity, God
never ceasing to 'empty out souls' in order to fill them up better.
Desire for vision: Faith.
Desire for possession: Hope.
Desire for love: Charity.
By expectation, God increases desire.
By desire, he empties out souls.
In emptying them out, he makes them more capable of receiving
him.
AuGUSTINE OF H IPPO Commentary on the First Epistle of St john,
4,6 (SC 7 5 , p. 230)

Within the person the 'inward thirst' is awoken, the 'inward eye'
is opened.
Hasten to the springs, draw from the wells.
In God is the wellspring of life,
A spring that can never fail.
In his light is found a light
That nothing can darken.
Desire that light which your eyes know not!
Your inward eye is preparing to see the light.
Your inward thirst burns to be quenched at the spring.
AUGUSTINE

OF HIPPO

Commentary on Psalm 41,2 (PL 3 6,46 5 )

1Numbering o f sentences i n S O 2 4 i s given i n brackets

24

Understanding the Mysteries

So then God offers himself, wishes to disclo:;e himself, but
he does not force us. His power is the power of love, and love
wants the freedom of the beloved. God speaks, and at the same
time keeps silence; he knocks at the door and waits. Everything is
dependent upon the royal freedom of faith. Everything hangs upon
our decision.
Here [in the spiritual realm] birth is not the result of intervention
from outside, as happens with bodily creatures who reproduce in
an external way. Spiritual birth is the result of free choice and we
are thus, in a sense, our own parents, creating ourselves as we want
to be, freely fashioning ourselves according to the pattern of our
choice.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Life of Moses, (PG 44,3 28C)

This is the wonderful call to conversion, a conversion attested
by deeds. The father of Western monasticism, St Benedict, throws
out the challenge:
Then let us arise! Scripture invites us in the words, ' It is full time
now for you to wake from sleep' (Romans I J . r r ) . With our eyes
open to the light that transfigures, our ears filled with the thunder
of his voice, let us listen to the powerful voice of God, urging us
day by day, 'Oh, that today you would hearken to his voice! Harden
not your hearts' (Psalm 95.8). And again: 'He who has an ear, let
him hear what the Spirit says to the churches' (Revelation 2.7).
And what does he say? 'Come, 0 children, listen to me, I will teach
you the fear of the Lord' (Psalm 34. r r ). 'Walk while you have the
light, lest the darkness overtake you' (John 1 2.3 5 ) . Moreover the
Lord, in seeking among the crowd for someone to work for him,
says, 'Who is there who desires life?' (Psalm 34.1 2). If you hear
him and answer, 'I do', God says to you, 'Do you desire true life,
eternal life?' then: 'Keep your tongue from evil, and your lips from
speaking deceit. Depart from evil, and do good; seek peace, and
pursue it' (Psalm ·3 4.13-14). And when you have done this I will
set my eyes upon you, I will give ear to your prayers, and 'Before
they call, I will answer' (Isaiah 6 5 .24).
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, Prologue 8-r8 (XV Centenary edition,
Desclee & Brouwer, Paris r98o, pp. 2 & 4 )

Quest, Encounter, and Decision

25

The Lord waits for us to respond day by day to his holy counsels
by our actions. In fact the days of this life are given us as a respite
to correct our errors, as the Apostle Paul says: 'Do you not know
that God's kindness is meant to lead you to repentance?' (Romans
2.4). And in his loving-kindness the Lord says, 'Have I any pleasure
in the death of the wicked . . . and not rather that he should turn
from his way and live?' (Ezekiel 1 8.23 )
BENEDICT O F NURSIA Rule, Prologue,
p. 6)

3 s-3 8 (XV Centenary edition

2

God, Hidden and Universal

History, including the history of Christianity, is littered with carica­
tures of God, like so many mental idols which have led people either
to cruelty or to atheism. But how, in modern times, after the growth
of liberty and the critical spirit, could people have accepted a God
who seemed to them worse than themselves, or at least inferior to the
highest demands of a conscience secretly nourished by the Gospel?
People never cease to project on to God their individual and
collective obsessions, so that they can appropriate and make use of
him. But they ought to understand that God cannot be apprehended
from without, as if he were an object, for with him there is no outside;
nor can the Creator be set side by side with the creature. 'In him we
live and move and have our being' (Acts 17.28), as St Paul said to the
Athenians. But, enclosed as we are within ourselves and also enclosed
'in his hand', we can know him only if he freely establishes with us a
relationship in which distance and nearness are made the setting for
a Word, of Someone speaking to someone.
Most people are enclosed in their mortal bodies like a snail in its
shell, curled up in their obsessions after the manner of hedgehogs.
They form their notion of God's blessedness taking themselves for
a model.
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA Miscellanies, V,I I (PG 9 ,10 3 )
Seeds in a pomegranate cannot see objects outside its rind, because
they are inside. Similarly human beings who are enclosed with all
creation in the hand of God cannot see God . . .
Friend, it is through him that you are speaking, it is he whom
you breathe, and you do not know it! For your eye is blind, your

God, Hidden and Universal

27

heart hardened. But, if you wish, you can be cured. Entrust yourself
to the doctor, and he will open the eyes of your soul and your heart.
Who is the doctor? God, using his word and his wisdom . . .
THEOPHI LUS OF ANTIOCH First Book to Auto/ycus, 5 & 7 (SC 20,
pp. 66 & 72)