The sacrifice of Jesus accomplishes the Father's eternal plan to
unite humanity with divinity, to bring alive and deify the depths of
human nature, of the universe, of being. Never again should we be
alone, shut out or lost. When we are in shame or despair, and there
seems no way out, Christ is waiting for us in silent love. And he
allows us to say Abba, Father, a word of childish tenderness. The
Son's 'passion of love' precedes his incarnation and instigates it. It
is inseparable from the Father's own mysterious 'passion of love'.
For in giving his Son, the Father gives himself. And how could he
have withheld him from the human race, seeing that the human race
in the person of Abraham was ready to give his own son to God ? This
divine 'passion of love', which will cease only when the Kingdom
has manifestly come, does not in the least impair the joy felt by
the Father and the Son in the depths of their divine nature (and
this joy is itself not impersonal, it is the Holy Spirit) . A saint, whilst
bearing within himself the immense joy of the divine presence, and
precisely because he is bearing it, shares unreservedly i n the distress
of others. How much more is that true of our God and of his
Christ, the ' Face of the Father', the pattern and focus of all sanctity!
If he came down to earth, it was out of compassion for the human
race. Yes, he suffered our sufferings even before suffering the
cross, even before taking our flesh. Indeed, if he had not suffered

46

Understanding the Mysteries

he would not have come to share our life with us. First he suffered,
then he carne down. But what is this passion that he felt for us?
It was the passion of love. And does not the Father himself, the
God of the universe 'slow to anger and abounding in steadfast
love' (Psalm 103.8) also in some way suffer with us? Are you not
aware that whilst governing human affairs he has compassion on
our sufferings? Look how 'the Lord your God bore you, as a man
bears his son' (Deuteronomy 1 . 3 1 ) . In the same way as the Son of
God 'bore our griefs', God bears with our behaviour. The Father
is not impassible either . . . He has pity, he knows something of the
passion of love, he has merciful impulses which it might seem his
sovereign majesty would have forbidden him.
ORIGEN Sixth Homily on Ezekiel, 6, 6 (GCS 8,3 84- 5 )

None of all this would make sense i f our faith did not teach us
that Jesus, because he is the Person in communion, without in the
least blurring the divine light (for the subject of his humanity is a
Person who is divine and therefore perfect) is not separated from
anything or anyone, but bears in himself the whole of humanity
and the universe. The idea of 'human nature' in the Fathers is not
philosophical but mystical, and denotes the unity of being common
to all, the one and only Man broken by the fall and restored in
Christ in the most literal sense.
The Word, in taking flesh, was mingled with humanity, and took
our nature within himself, so that the human should be deified
by this mingling with God: the stuff of our nature was entirely
sanctified by Christ, the first fruits of creation.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Against Apollinarius, 2 (PG 4 5, 1 1 28)

The whole of humanity 'forms, so to speak, a single living being'.
In Christ we form a single body, we are all 'members of one another'.
Since humankind had imprisoned itself in death, it was necessary that
God, by taking flesh, should allow himself to be imprisoned by death,
in order to destroy his kingdom and to open to all flesh the way to
resurrection. For the one flesh of humanity and of the earth 'brought
into contact' in Christ 'with the fire' of his divinity, is henceforward
secretly and sacramentally deified.
Our whole nature had to be recalled from death to life. God there­
fore stooped over our dead body to offer his hand, so to speak,

The God-Man

47

to the creature lying there. He came near enough to death to make
contact with our mortal remains, and by means of his own body
provided nature with the capacity for resurrection, thus by his
power raising to life the whole of humanity . . .
In our body the activity of any one of our senses communicates
sensation to the whole of the organism joined to that member. It
is the same for humanity as a whole, which forms, so to speak, a
single living being: the resurrection of one member extends to all,
and that of a part to the whole, by virtue of the cohesion and unity
of human nature.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Catechetical Orations, 3 2 (PG 4 5 ,8o)

How could humanity on earth, enslaved by death, recover its
wholeness? It was necessary to give to dead flesh the ability to
share in the life-giving power of God. Now the life-giving power
of God is the Word, the only Son. He it was then whom God sent
to us as Saviour and Liberator . . . He, though he is Life by nature,
took a body subject to decay in order to destroy in it the power
of death and transform it into life. As iron when it is brought in
contact with fire immediately begins to share its colour, so the flesh
when it has received the life-giving Word into itself is set free from
corruption. Thus he put on our flesh to set it free from death.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Homily on Luke, V, 19 (PG 72, 1 72)

The cross, inseparable from the descent into hell, the resurrec­
tion, and the ascens.ion to the right hand of the Father, is seen as
fundamentally life-giving. Its dimensions make of Christ the truly
cosmic Man who transfigures the universe: ' Henceforward all is
filled with light, the heavens, the earth and even hell', according
to the Easter liturgy in the Byzantine rite. To be crucified in Christ
is to die to one's own death in order to enter into the sacrifice that
restores wholeness, and to understand, as St Paul says, 'the breadth
and length and height and depth' of love (Ephesians 3 . I 8- I 9 ).
' . . . that you may have power to comprehend with all the saints
what is the breadth and length and height and depth' (Ephesians
3 . I 8-I9). The cross of Christ has all these dimensions. By the
cross, in fact, 'when he ascended on high he led captivity captive'
(Ephesians 4.8, Psalm 68. I 8 ). By it indeed 'he descended into the
lower parts of the earth'. For the cross has a 'height' and a 'depth',

48

Understanding the Mysteries

and its 'breadth' and 'length' extend over all the immensity of the
universe. Whoever is 'crucified with Christ', and knows the agony
of this crucifixion, comprehends 'the breadth, the length, the height
and the depth'.
ORIGEN Fragment of a Commentary on the Epistle to the Ephesians
(Gregg p. 4 1 1 - 1 2)