(a) contemplation of nature, i.e. of 'second nature', that is,
of the spiritual essence of things, their logoi, and of 'first nature',
a participation in angelic knowledge, the traversing of the higher
'aeons' in which the intellect, coming to know God's providence and
j udgment, strips itself increasingly.
(b) knowledge of God, i.e. a reabsorption of the human being
into the original 'bare intellect', the 'place of God', the interior heaven
filled with a 'light without form', which is not only that of the intellect
but 'the light of the Blessed Trinity'.
The Church had to exercise discernment, conscious or instinc­
tive, in regard to this admirable but ambiguous work. The Fifth Ecu­
menical Council in 5 5 3 condemned Evagrius' metaphysical system
along with that of Origen, from which it is derived and which it made

332

Biographical Notes

more rigid. The Gnostic Chapters, a basic text, disappeared from
Greek tradition. The ascetic works on the other hand never ceased
being read whether under the name of Evagrius (the Practicus) or
under that of St Nil us (the fine treatise On Prayer). The Syrian Church
subsequently translated and venerated the whole of Evagrius' work,
which enabled Antoine Guillaumont to reconstitute the Kephalaia
Gnostica, emending the text and interpreting it with commentary.
Evagrius' influence was great in the East, and also, chiefly
through Cassian, in the West. But it was counterbalanced by a
more biblical current that put the theme of the 'heart' at the centre,
with the transfiguration of the body. This current was swollen by
the strong Gospel emphasis of the first monks. The principal ex­
pression of it in the early Church is to be found in the homilies of
Pseudo-Macarius.
Centuries PO 28, 1 ; Practicus SC 1 70 & 1 7 1 ; Mirror of Nuns
and Mirror of Monks, Gressmann 39,4 pp. 1 4 6- 1 5 1 & 1 5 2- 1 6 5 ;
Pareneticus, Letters, Frankenberg Berlin 1 9 1 2; O n the Eight Spirits
of Evil (attributed to St Nilus of Ancyra); On Prayer (ascribed to
Nil us) PG 79,1 I 4 5 - I 2oo; cf. also Les Kephalaia Gnostica d'Evagre
le Pontique A. Guillaumont Paris 1962

F ELICITY AND PERPETUA (martyred 203 )
The Martyrdom of Perpetua and Felicity, who were put to death at

Carthage on 7 March 203, was written shortly after the event, the
anonymous author reproducing an autobiography of Perpetua and
some notes by Saturus, these texts concerning in particular their
visions. It seems that the author - contrary to the traditional view
- was not Tertullian, except perhaps for the introduction and the
conclusion.
Vibia Perpetua was twenty two years old. She was accompanied
by her slave Felicity who gave birth to a child during her imprison­
ment. Both received baptism in prison. The narrative describes also
the martyrdom of three catechumens and of Saturus who had evan­
gelized the whole group.
This unadorned text, coming in part from the future martyrs
themselves, enables us to understand the meaning of martyrdom as
a mystical experience, as identification with the Crucified and Risen
Christ.

Biographical Notes

333

The Passion has come down to us in two texts, one Greek, the
other Latin, the latter without doubt the original. Knopf-Kriiger,
Ausgewahlte Martyrakten, Tiibingen 1 9 29.

GREGORY THE GREAT ( 5 40 - 604)

In an Italy ravaged by the invasions, Gregory sensed the tragedy of
the end of a world, which he took for the end of the whole world (as
in the East a century later Maximus the Confessor was to do). But
the expectation of the Kingdom increased in him his pastoral zeal for
strengthening the faith of the humble and evangelizing the barbarians.
Accordingly he gave fresh expression to the spiritual interpretation of
the Bible, to the intuitions of the Fathers, and to monastic experience.
He did this in the profound and familiar language of a wisdom and also in the development of a liturgy - in which eschatological
disquiet is calmed and transfigured because 'already the glory of the
Kingdom on high is communicated to it, by anticipation'. (Homilies
on the Gospels, 2). In this way without seeking to do so, almost as
a superfluous extra, Gregory fertilized the spirituality of the Latin
world at least up to the Cistercian twelth century, and probably laid
the foundations of a popular Christian culture.
Gregory was born at Rome into a patrician family that had been
faithful to Christianity for a long time and had already produced a
Pope and several saints. He received a sound classical education,
but without becoming unduly attached to it, as he felt that the old
culture was dying. His career was at first administrative, as the
ruined city was being included in the Empire again after Justinian's
reconquest, and Gregory, in spite of his lively Italian patriotism,
always considered himself a subject of the Empire. He became ' Prefect
of the City' and quickly made himself conversant with the affairs of
the world, in the service of the common good. But quite soon the
anguish of the period spurred him on to 'the one thing necessary':
he renounced everything a nd converted his house on the Coelian
Hill into a monastery. There followed years of prayer and study, on
which he would always look back with nostalgia. He steeped himself
in Scripture and the Fathers. He elaborated a balanced synthesis
between Augustine's passionate theology and Cassian's calm ascesis.
But once again, much against his will, the time to serve came. (He
himself later, when Pope in an Italy where men of culture and depth
had become rare, often entrusted ecclesiastical responsibilities and

33 4

Biographical Notes