As for the conditions established for humanity by our great God
and Saviour Jesus Christ in accordance with God's goodness . . .
all was effected by the Spirit.
He was present from the first in the flesh of the Lord when he
made himself 'unction' and he is his inseparable companion, as it is
written, 'He on whom you see the Spirit descend and remain . . . is
my beloved Son' (John 1 .3 3 ; Matthew 3 · 1 7). Also: 'You know . . .
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Spirit' (Acts
10.3 8). Then the whole of Christ's activity developed in the power
of the Spirit. He was present also when Christ was tempted by the
devil, for it is written: 'Jesus was led up by the Spirit into the wilder­
ness to be tempted by the devil' (Matthew 4.1) . He was still with
him, inseparably, when Jesus performed his miracles, for, 'it is by
the Spirit of God that I cast out demons' (Matthew r 2.28 ). He did
not depart from him after his resurrection from the dead. When the
Lord, to renew man and to restore to him the grace received from
the breath of God, breathed on the face of his disciples, what did
he say? 'Receive the Holy Spirit' (John 20.22).
BASI L OF CiESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 16 (PG 3 2, 1 40)

Formulations are to be found in the Fathers or i n a ncient litur­
gical texts which, if we knew how to develop them, would enable
us to harmonize the two approaches, Western a nd Eastern, to the
'procession' of the Holy Spirit. Thus, in the third century, at a time
when Christian reflection was still fluid and diverse, Dionysius of
Ror:ne in a letter to his namesake at Alexandria notes that the Spirit
proceeds from the Father in the Son (text quoted by St Athanasius
in his Letter on the Decrees of the Council of Niccea, 26).
In the following century Athanasius himself writes:
The Spirit is not external to the Word, but because he is in the
Word it is through him that he is in God [God, here, denotes the
Father as 'source of the godhead'] .
Letter to Serapion, III (PG 26,63 3 )

72

Understanding the Mysteries

If the Father is mentioned, his Word is also present with him, and
equally the Spirit who is in the Son.
Letter to Serapion, I (PG 26,565)
We might ask whether the subsequent controversies did not
arise because people partly forgot the properly divine 'logic' which is
always simultaneously one and threefold, quite surpassing the fallen
rationality, the process of which remains binary. To say that the Spirit
'proceeds' from the Father is necessarily to name the Son, since from
all eternity the Father puts his Other in unity; so when he causes the
Spirit to 'proceed' he remains the Father of the Son. To say that the
Son is 'begotten' of the Father is necessarily to name the Spirit, the
Breath that carries the Word. For the Spirit, as Gregory of Nyssa for
example writes, is at the same time 'the Kingdom of the Father and
the Unction of the Son' (Against Apollinaris, 52 ( PG 4 5 , 1 249)).
The Byzantine liturgy for Pentecost admirably expounds this
'meta-logic' which is that of ineffable Love:
Come, ye people, let us adore God in three persons:
The Father in the Son, with the Holy Spirit.
For the Father from everlasting begets the Word,
who shares his Kingdom and his eternity,
and the Holy Spirit is in the Father,
glorified with the Son,
a single power,
a single essence,
a single godhead.
This it is whom we adore, saying:
Holy God, who didst create all by thy Son with the aid of the Holy
Spirit;
Holy and Strong, by whom we have come to know the Father, by
whom the Holy Spirit has come into the world;
Holy and Immortal, Spirit of Consolation, who dost proceed from
the Father and dwellest in the Son:
Glory be to thee, 0 Holy Trinity!
Great Vespers of Pentecost in the Byzantine Rite

The Church's existence also must be an existence in the Spirit:
And the Church? Is it not the work of the Spirit? For it is the
Spirit, Paul says, who has given to the Church 'first apostles, second

God: Unity and Difference

73

prophets, third teachers, then workers of miracles, then healers,
helpers, administrators, speakers in various kinds of tongues' ( I
Corinthians 1 2.28). The Spirit establishes this order in the distri­
bution of his gifts.
BASIL OF CJESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 1 6 (PG 3 2, 1 4 1 )

In God the Holy Spirit i s almost anonymous ( since G o d i s
entirely Spirit, entirely Holy). H e is almost confused with the un­
moving movement of love in the divine nature, with the divine
'common nature', as St Basil says. He is revealed as rich, 'variegated'
with all the divine names, and so almost indistinguishable from the
divine energies that he imparts to us, in our inmost depths. It is
as if he were effacing himself.
When I think of the profusion of the names of the Spirit I
am seized with dread: Spirit of God, Spirit of Christ, Spirit of
Adoption. He renews us in baptism and resurrection. He blows
where he wills. Source of light and life, he makes of me a temple,
he makes me divine . . . Everything that God does is done by the
Spirit. He multiplies himself in tongues of fire and he multiplies his
gifts, he raises up preachers, apostles, prophets, pastors, teachers
. . . He is another Comforter . . . as if he were another God.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Fifth Theological Oration, 29 (PG 3 6, 1 6 5 )

The Spirit is the hidden God, the inward God, deeper than our
greatest depth. He gives life to all things and we breathe him without
being aware of it. He is the breath of God in the breathing of the
world, of humanity.
God has given to the earth the breath which feeds it. It is his breath
that gives life to all things. And if he were to hold his breath,
everything would be annihilated. His breath vibrates in yours, in
your voice. It is the breath of God that you breathe - and you are
unaware of it.
THEOPHILUS OF ANTIOCH Three Books to Autolycus, 1,7 (SC 20,
p. 72)

But this hidden God is not lost in immanence; he is entirely
movement towards Christ, and, through Christ, towards the Father,

74

Understanding the Mysteries

in the same way as the energies that he imparts flow from the Father
through the Son.
The way to the knowledge of God leads from the Spirit in Unity
through the Son in Unity to the Father of Unity, and, in the opposite
direction, the fullness and the holiness of the divine essence, its royal
dignity, comes from the Father by means of the Son to the Holy
Spirit.
BASIL OF CJESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 1 8 (PG 3 2, 1 5 J )