Whoever passes from ascesis to inner freedom is able to contemplate
in the Holy Spirit the truth of creatures and things. It is as if he
passed from the flesh of Christ to his soul.
Another, through this symbolic contemplation of the world,
passes to the more naked mystical initiation that is 'theology'. It
is as if he passed from the soul of Christ to his spirit.
Another, through this state, is mystically led to the ineffable
state where all definition is overridden by a radical negation. It is
as if he passed from the spirit of Christ to his divinity.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 I , I J 6o)

The Fathers adopted the Platonic and Aristotelian conception of
the soul's faculties, giving it added depth. They distinguish the nous
(the mind or intellect), the thumos (courage and gallantry that can
turn to aggression and anger), and finally epithumia ( desire that is
in danger of being converted into lust). In the deep sense the nous
is identified with what Mark the Ascetic calls the 'altar of the heart',
that relationship with God that nothing in human nature can destroy,
even if it is unperceived or rejected. But the light of the nous can
refuse to make itself known, and it is at this subtle high point of the
soul that Satanic pride is born.
If we seek some approximate equivalents in modern psychology,
the domain of the nous might be that explored by Frankl and the
'existential psychologists', for whom the unconscious reveals a spir­
itual dimension that points to God. The domain of the thumos
would be more like Adler's idea of the desire, that is at the centre
of the unconscious, to assert oneself, to prove one's worth. Finally
epithumia calls to mind the Freudian libido.
For most ascetical authors, although these classifications vary
considerably and need to be understood in context, there exist two
overriding 'mother-passions'. One concerns the irrational faculties
(thumos and epithumia), namely gluttony in the sense of fundamental
greed; the other concerns nous, namely pride. Pride and greed form an
alliance in a sort of metaphysical usurpation that annexes the whole
being to the ego. Spiritual writers, especially Maximus the Confessor,
speak here of philautia, self-love, self-centredness, that snatches the
world away from God to annex it, making neighbours into things.

The Interior Combat

135

There is no longer the Other, nor other people, only the absolute I.
' Whoever has philautia has all the passions', according to Maxim us.
Greed unleashes debauchery as an expression of sexuality. The
two together, to satisfy themselves, breed avarice. Avarice produces
depression - grief at not possessing everything - and envy - of those
who possess. Thus arises anger, against anyone who threatens my
goods, or who forestalls me in securing something that I covet.
Pride, in its turn, begets 'vain glory', the display of riches and
temptations, followed by anger and depression when the sought-for
adp1iration and approval is lacking. So we come back, through
the deep desire to monopolize, to greed. The two circles meet and
form an ellipse with two poles.
In the unleashing of passions others accord a privileged position
to the 'three giants': forgetfulness, spiritual insensitivity, and a kind
of ignorance or stupidity. We forget that God exists, that we can
receive him at every moment; we ignore our neighbours; we lose the
capacity for wonder; and we end by living like sleep-walkers.
It will do no harm to quote two passages from St John Dama­
scene, who, although he falls j ust outside my chronological limits, has
in this case the merit of summing up the earlier tradition very clearly.
We should know that according to the Fathers there are eight kinds
of thought that attack us. The first is gluttony; the second, lust;
the third, avarice; the fourth, depression; the fifth, anger; the sixth,
despair; the seventh, vain glory; the eighth, pride.
jOHN OF DAMASCUS The Eight Spirits of Evil (PG 9 5 ,80)

We should commit no sin if these powerful giants had not ap­
peared at the beginning, as Mark the wisest of sages says, namely
forgetfulness, spiritual insensitivity, and ignorance . . . The primary
cause, the baleful mother of them all, so to say, is philautia - love
of self.
jOHN OF DAMASCUS On Virtues and Vices (PG 9 5 , 8 8 )

Perhaps however Maximus the Confessor goes deepest when he
notes:
The cause of this deviation [of the natural energies into destructive
passions] is the hidden fear of death.
MAxiMUS THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, 61 (PG 90,63 3 )

Then:

Initiation for Warfare

136

We who constitute a single nature devour one another like serpents.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, Introduction
(PG 90,26o)

And the reason:
Only love overcomes the fragmentation of human nature.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, (PG 9 1 ,396)

It is now possible to understand the function of praxis. It aims
to transform, in love, with the object of making love possible, the
intelligence and the passions of human nature.
Praxis is a spiritual method for purifying the part of the soul
that is concerned with the passions.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Practical Treatise, or The Monk, 78 (SC 1 7 1 ,
P. 666)

A prayer that is specially loved and used a great deal in the
Orthodox Church, St Ephraim's prayer, gives an idea of the working
of this transformation:
Lord and Master of my life,
take far from me the spirit of laziness, discouragement, domination,
and idle talk;
grant to me, thy servant, a spirit of chastity, humility, patience,
love;
yea, my Lord and King, grant me to see my sins, and not to judge
my neighbour,
for thou art blessed for ever and ever. Amen.
EPHRAIM OF SYRIA Prayer for the season of Lent in the Byzantine
Rite

' Laziness' here is to be identified with forgetfulness, with the
'hardness' of heart that makes a person see no further than appear­
ances, 'sense-data', what we can 'get our teeth into', as we vividly put
it. It is the condition of the anti-poet, of the anti-mystic, of the 'spir­
itual bourgeois', to use Nicholas Berdyaev's words. It gives rise to the
spirit of domination that was the object of Christ's third temptation,
and comes close to pride. As for the 'idle talk', this is the 'care­
less words' of the Gospel (Matthew 1 2. 3 6 ) : words of lying, magic,

The Interior Combat

1 37

possession, profit-making, death. More deeply; however, they are
words of discouragement, of despair, of fascination with nothingness.
This is the 'accidie' well known to the greatest ascetics, but which in
our time has become the everyday expression of a general nihilism.
The second part of the prayer develops in counterpoint the
operation of the virtues. Faith that overcomes philautia; chastity that
is not necessarily continence, since marriage can be chaste, but rather
means the integration of desire in a personal relationship; humility
and patience that apply the faith to everyday matters and strengthen
it with an invincible hope. And clear self-knowledge, the basis not of
a guilt-inducing obsession but of a greater confidence; the refusal to
j udge others; and finally the seal of the blessing, exchanged between
humanity and God for the sanctification of the whole of life.
The basis of praxis is the 'keeping of the commandments'. These
'commandments' refer less to the Decalogue - except to the extent
that Jesus disclosed and made incarnate their spiritual meaning than to the inj unctions and the actions of Christ, and a bove all the
Sermon on the Mount, the Beatitudes. For the Beatitudes describe
Christ himself, his beauty - and through him the very mystery of
the God of kenosis and love. To obey Christ's commandments is to
love him, and to beseech him, aided by our very weakness, to take
possession of us and transform our life with his.
Whoever knows the power of God's commandments and under­
stands the faculties of the soul is aware of the way in which the
former heal the latter and are the way to true contemplation.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Centuries, 11,19 (Frankenberg, p. 1 4 3 )