Nor is God an object of knowledge. Concepts, which never come
without a secret wish to classify and to possess, are powerless to grasp
the one by whom we ought to let ourselves be grasped. 'Grasped'
in two senses: of being opened to receive him, as he freely reveals
himself, and of being seized with wonder.
Every concept formed by the intellect in an attempt to comprehend
and circumscribe the divine nature can succeed only in fashioning
an idol, not in making God known.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Life of Moses, (PG 44,377)

Only wonder can comprehend his incomprehensible power.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR On the Divine Names, 1 (PG 4,192)

Thus the Bride in the Song of Songs, according to the commen足
tary of Gregory of Nyssa, never ceases to seek the Bridegroom, who
attracts her from a distance to which he constantly withdraws.
The Bride speaks: 'Upon my bed by night I sought him whom
my soul loves . . . but found him not. I called him, but he
gave no answer.' How indeed could she reach with a name the
one who is above every name?
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Song of Songs, 6 (PG 44, 8 9 3 )

The true way to approach the mystery is in the first place cel足
ebration, celebration by the whole cosmos. According to the Fathers,
the fall impaired the capacity of creatures to see the divine light, but
did not destroy it. The universal aspiration towards God has, it is true,
become a 'groaning', a 'sigh of creation', but it is still prayer, which is
the essential activity of all created things: ' Everything that exists prays
to thee'. The inexhaustible nature of transcendence is expressed in
the profusion of creatures. The universe is the first Bible. Each being
manifests the creative word which gives it its identity and attracts it.
Each being manifests a dynamic idea, something willed by God. Ulti足
mately each thing is a created name of him who cannot be named.

28

Understanding the Mysteries

0 thou who art beyond all,
How canst thou be called by another name?
What hymn can sing of thee?
No name describes thee.
What mind can grasp thee?
No intellect conceives thee.
Thou only art inexpressible;
All that is spoken comes forth from thee.
Thou only art unknowable;
All that is thought comes forth from thee.
All creatures praise thee,
Those that speak and those that are dumb.
All creatures bow down before thee,
Those that can think and those that have no power of thought.
The universal longing, the groaning of creation tends towards
thee.
Everything that exists prays to thee
And to thee every creature that can read thy universe
Sends up a hymn of silence.
In thee alone all things dwell.
With a single impulse all things find their goal in thee.
Thou art the purpose of every creature.
Thou art unique.
Thou art each one and art not any.
Thou art not a single creature nor art thou the sum of creatures;
All names are thine; how shall I address thee,
Who alone cannot be named? . . .
Have mercy, 0 thou, the Beyond All;
How canst thou be called by any other name?

GREGORY NAZIANZEN Dogmatic Poems, (PG 3 7, 507-8)

From all eternity God lives and reigns in glory. Each ray of that
glory is a divine Name and the1'e Names are innumerable. Dionysius
the Areopagite, who wrote an admirable treatise, the Divine Names,
lists some of them taken from the Bible and the Gospels. The Fathers
also identify them with the 'powers' or the 'energies' that spring from
the unapproachable nature of God. At the moment of creation it
is this glory, the chabod of the Bible, which completes the things
created, giving them at once their density and their transparency.
The energies then become so many modes of the divine presence.
The 'Word', the logos, that establishes each creature, enables it to
share.these energies, or, in the case of human beings, invites them

God, Hidden and Universal

29

to share them. Thus every creature names, or ought to name, in
its own peculiar fashion, the divine Names. In spite of sin, which
means exile from the glory, the world is still the vast theophany
honoured by the religions of antiquity.
Taught thus, theologians praise the divine Origin for having no
name and yet possessing all names.
For not having any name because, as they recall, the deity
himself, in one of the mystical visions in which he is symbolically
revealed, reproved the man who asked, 'Tell, I pray, your name'
(Genesis 3 2.29 ), and to avert him from any knowledge that could
be expressed in a name, said, 'Why do you ask my name, seeing
it is wonderful?' (Judges I J . I 8). And is it not indeed wonderful,
this name which surpasses every name, this nameless name, that is
'above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in
that which is to come' (Ephesians 1 . 2 1 ) ?
And they praise him for having many names, when they see
that he says of himself, 'I am who I am' (Exodus J . J4 ), or again
Life, Light, God, Truth, and when those who know God honour
the universal Cause with various names inspired by his effects, such
as Goodness, Beauty, Wisdom, . . . Giver of life, Intelligence, . . .
Ancient of Days, Eternal Youth, Salvation, Justice, Sanctification,
Liberation, as surpassing all grandeur, and manifesting himself to
humanity in a gentle breeze. They declare, moreover, that this
divine Origin . . . is simultaneously at the heart of the universe
and far beyond the sky, sun, stars, fire, water, wind, dew, cloud,
rock, stone, and in a word all that is and nothing that is.
So this cause of everything which surpasses everything is at
the same time namelessness which befits him and all the names
of all the creatures . . . He contains in himself from the beginning
all creatures . . . in such a way that he can be honoured and
named in terms of every creature.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, I,r,6 (PG 3 , 596)

However, the world masks the mystery as much as it expresses
it. A negative approach is therefore indispensable, one which sweeps
away the idols of the mind, the systems, the intellectual concepts,
along with the images of sense experience. In the first place, the
mystery of Being cannot be confounded with a being, even though it
might be at the summit of the hierarchy of beings. The one Being is the
cause of being, and so cannot be a being. That philosophical idol, the
'Good Lord' of a certain type of Christianity, or the 'supreme being'

30

Understanding the Mysteries

of spiritualism, has brought about simultaneously the 'death of God'
and the loss of the mystery of Being.
The Living One, however, is no more the unlimited Being, the
theotes, or divinity, of the gnostics than he is the supreme being of
a closed monotheism. The life of the Living One that is expressed
in the profusion of divine names and theophanies originates in the
inexhaustible depths of personal Love. So the abyss is neither un足
differentiated nor indifferent. From it we derive freedom and love,
crucified and divinizing love. It is this supreme revelation - that of
Cnrist - which we must understand from expressions suggesting
both an unfathomable plenitude exceeding even our idea of God
and our absorption in Being. And perhaps contemporary atheism,
to the extent that it is not stupidity but a purifying revolt, could
be understood in a new way, as the path of 'unknowing' that is
not an intellectual path (for negation is denied j ust as much as
affirmation) but is pure adoration.
To celebrate the negations . . . in order to attain unveiled knowledge
of this unknowing, that is hidden in every being by the knowledge
that can be had of it, in order to see in this way that superessential
obscurity, that is hidden by all the light that is contained m
beings.
DIONYSJUS THE AREOPAGITE Mystical Theology, II (PG J , I 0 2 5 )