Sometimes one who is advanced in the spiritual life is set free,
in Christ, from the fallen and divisive limitations of space and time,
and shares in the apparently incomprehensible ways of God.
Two brothers were going to see Anthony. On their journey they ran
out of water and one of the two died. The other was at death's door.
At the end of his strength he lay down on the ground awaiting death.
Anthony, sitting on the mountain side, called two monks who were
there and urged them, 'Take a jug of water and hurry to the road
from Egypt. Two brothers were coming. One of them is already
dead, and the other is going to die unless you are quick. This has
just been revealed to me in prayer.' The monks went and found the
dead monk and buried him. Then they refreshed the exhausted one
with a drink of water and took him to the elder. The distance was
a day's journey. Someone perhaps will ask, 'Why did not Anthony
speak before the first monk died?' That would be wrong. It was no
business of Anthony's to determine the time of his death. That is
reserved to God, and God decreed death for the one and revealed
to Anthony the danger in which the other was.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA Life of Anthony, 59 (PG 26,9 27)

The tender compassion of the great spiritual guide has something
maternal about it. It is as if he had become a complete human being
reconciling in himself the animus and the anima, the masculine and
the feminine dimensions of humanity.
Some elders came to see Abba Poimen to ask him, ' If we see
some brothers dozing in the congregation, do you want us to

1 48

Initiation for Warfare

reprove them so that they stay awake?' He said to them, 'For my
part, when I see a brother dozing, I lay his head on my lap and let
him rest.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Poimen, 92 (PG 65,344)

The spiritual father is wise. First of all he welcomes his 'son'
into his prayer. The latter must not bother him with trivial details
of his daily life but must consult him especially when a particular
thought becomes persistent and obsessive. The exception occurs only
at certain times when a rigorous and detailed opening of the heart
proves indispensable.
Brother, nothing is to be gained by consulting your spiritual father
about all the thoughts that come into your mind. Most of them
quickly disappear. You need to ask about those that persist and
make war on you.
BARSANUPHIUS Letter I65 (Correspondance, Solesmes 1 9 7 1 , p. 1 4 1 )

Brother, do not try yourself to discern the thoughts that come into
your mind. You are not capable . . . If they worry you . . . cast
your powerlessness before God, saying, 'Lord, I am in thy hands,
come to my help.' . . . As for the thought that persists in you and
makes war on you, tell it to your Abba and by God's grace he will
cure you.
BARSANUPHIUS Letter I42, (Correspondance, Solesmes 1 9 7 1 , p. 174)

The refectorian had a habit that intrigued me greatly. He
always carried a notebook hanging from his belt, and I discovered
that he noted in it all the thoughts that came to him so as to report
them to his spiritual father every day.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 4th step, 3 2(43 ) p. 3 9

The 'father' leads his 'spiritual son' to freedom, for
In the One
there is no longer master or disciple
but all are gods.
EVAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Centuries, IV, s 8 (Frankenberg, p. 297)

3

Confidence and Humility

Christian ascesis is distinct from 'techniques' of self-control, serenity,
inner life, that enable one to enjoy a methodically acquired euphoria;
it is at the service of a personal relationship. Personal loyalty to a
hidden and revealed personal presence requires faith and humility,
which are therefore the most important things. Humility is not the
will to be nothing in order to become all: rather it is the acceptance
of self in openness to the Other.
For a Christian the divine cannot be reduced to the exploration
of one's own inner life or the acquisition of cosmic 'powers'. The
divine has nothing to do with scientism, however spiritualistically
inclined. It is Someone who comes to us in the sovereign freedom
of his love. Grace does not come to order. We can only prepare
ourselves to receive it, making ourselves attentive to the possibility
of a meeting.
Can a person or a thing, regarded in its solidity, avoid being
seen when it comes before our eyes? The higher divine realities
on the other hand, even when they are in front of us, can be
perceived only with their own consent. It depends entirely on them
whether they are seen or hidden.
It was by grace that God revealed himself to Abraham and the
other prophets. The eye of the heart itself did not allow Abraham
to see God, but the grace of God was offered spontaneously to the
gaze of that righteous man. This is true not only of God the Father
but also of our Lord and Saviour, and of the Holy Spirit . . .
So let us too make an effort so that from today God may appear
to us, as we have been promised by a text of Scripture that says: 'He
manifests himself to those who do not distrust him' (Wisdom 1 . 2).
0RIGEN Homily 3 on Luke, I , I I (CGS 9,20- 3 )

1 50

Initiation for Warfare