Empire lived in an intellectual climate very like our own; materialism
and scepticism, together with dabblings in syncretist beliefs, were
resulting in a mixture very different from the ancient religions, which
had long ago been rendered obsolete by rationalism and the discovery
of the individual. In short, what was then true of restricted urban
groups is now true of everybody.
Hilary quickly took the measure of a society bent upon instant
gratification, and, driven on by his horror at the prospect of purpose­
lessness and nothingness, set out on the search for the meaning of life.
Passing rapidly through stupid materialism and decaying paganism
and pseudo-scientific occultism, he discovered in the biblical teaching
of the Jews the living God who transcends all things yet is present
in them, outside everything yet inside, the ex-centric centre, the
'author of beauty' disclosed in the beauty of the world. But only
the Gospel of the Word-made-flesh, the Gospel of the resurrection
of the flesh, could assure him that he would not be 'reduced to
non-being': that he, Hilary, was an irreplaceable person and would
be wholly loved and saved, body and soul, by the combination
of grace and his own freedom.
I began the search for the meaning of life. At first I was attracted by
riches and leisure . . . But most people discover that human nature
wants something better to do than just gormandize and kill time.
They have been given life in order to achieve something worth
while, to make use of their talents. It could not have been given
them without some benefit in eternity. How otherwise could one
regard as a gift from God a life so eaten away by anguish, so riddled
with vexation, which left to itself would simply wear out, from the
prattle of the cradle to the drivel of senility? Look at people who
have practised patience, chastity and forgiveness. The good life for
them meant good deeds and good thoughts. Could the immortal
God have given us life with no other horizon but death? Could
he have inspired us with such a desire to live, if the only outcome
would be the horror of death? . . .
Then I sought to know God better . . . Some religions teach
that there are different families of deities. They imagine male gods
and female ones and can trace the lineage of these gods born
from one another. Other religions teach that there are greater
and lesser deities, with different attributes. Some claim that there
is no God at all and worship nature, which, according to them,
came about purely by chance. Most, however, admit that God
exists, but hold him to be indifferent to human beings . . . I

Quest, Encounter, and Decision

19

was reflecting on these problems when I discovered the books
which the Jewish religion says were composed by Moses and the
prophets. There I discovered that God bears witness to himself
in these terms: 'I am who I am,' and: 'Say this to the people
of Israel, "I AM has sent me to you'" (Exodus 3 · 1 4). I was
filled with wonder at this perfect definition which translates into
intelligible words the incomprehensible knowledge of God. Nothing
better suggests God than Being. 'He who is' can have neither end
nor beginning . . . And since God's eternity cannot contradict
itself, in order to assert his unapproachable eternity, God needed
only to assert solemnly that he is.
But it was necessary also to recognize God's work . . .
'Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand and
marked off the heavens with a span ?' (Isaiah 40. 1 2).
and later:
' Heaven is my throne and the earth is my footstool . . . All
these things my hand has made' (Isaiah 66. 1-2).
The whole heavens are held in God's hand, the whole earth
in the hollow of his hand . . . The heaven is also his throne and
the earth his footstool. We should certainly avoid too human an
image of God, as someone sitting on a throne with his feet on a
footstool. His throne and footstool are his infinite omnipotence,
which embraces everything in the hollow of his hand. The imagery
borrowed from created things signifies that God exists in them
and outside them, that he both transcends and pervades them,
that he surpasses all creatures and yet dwells in them. The hollow
of his hand symbolizes the power of his divinity revealing itself.
The throne and the footstool show he controls external objects
because he is within them, but at the same time he envelops
them and encloses them within himself. He is inside and outside
everything . . . Nothing is beyond the reach of the one who is
infinite . . . What came to light as a result of my search was
well expressed by the prophet:
'Whither shall I go from thy Spirit?
Or whither shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend to heaven, thou art there!
If I make my bed in Sheol, thou art there!
If I take the wings of the morning and dwell in the uttermost
parts of the sea,
even there thy hand shall lead me, and thy right hand shall
hold me' (Psalm 1 3 9·?-IO).

20

Understanding the Mysteries