Beyond an ethic of law (certainly not within it as far as the
Christian is concerned ) we are called, as we gradually deepen our
faith, to invent a paradoxical morality, that of creative love. This
morality gives precedence to the person, the mystery of the person's
nature and destiny, over social ideas of right and j ustice. So Jesus,
faced with the woman taken in adultery, reminds her would-be
executioners of their own state of separation from God and of their
spiritual adultery. 'Let whichever is without sin among you be the
first to throw a stone at her.' And to the woman he said, ' Neither
do I condemn you; go, and do not sin again' ( John 8 . r - r r ).
For the person who has begun to tread the spiritual path, nothing
is more important than the Gospel command: ' Do not j udge'. Greed
and vanity are passions that belong to those who are novices on the
way or who have only j ust begun to advance along it. But for the more
advanced, the breakdown always comes from j udgement pronounced
on others. Then all their ascesis is affected by spiritual Pharisaism, in
the sense given that word in the Gospel.
Ascesis has no value if it does not help to deepen humility humility as the capacity for disinterested love. That is why, according
to spiritual teachers, the whole of virtue is comprised in the refusal
to depise.
The failures of beginners result almost always from greed.
In those who are making progress the failures come also from
too high an opinion of themselves.
In those nearing perfection they come solely from judging their
neighbour.
jOHN CLJMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 2 5 th step, 1 6, ( 1 8 )
(p. 87)

Abba Theodore of Pherme said, 'There is no other virtue than that
of not despising anyone.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Theodore of Pherme, 13 (PG 6 5 , 1 89)

The fundamental temptation is admirably depicted in Genesis in
the dialogue that takes place a fter the Fall, between God and the first
human couple. 'The man said, "The woman whom thou gavest to be

282

Approaches to Contemplation

with me, she gave me fruit of the tree, and I ate. " . . . The woman
said, "The serpent beguiled me, and I ate." ' (Genesis 3 . I 2-r 3 ). It was
the serpent's fault, it was the woman's fault, it was God's fault, who
'gave this woman to be with me'.
To j ustify ourselves by condemning others is our permanent
tendency, in private as in public life. True nobility is to take re­
sponsibility oneself. True humility and true love, in the spiritual
order, consist in knowing ourselves to be guilty 'in everything and
for everyone'.
Abba John said, 'We have rejected the light burden of condemning
ourselves, and we have chosen to carry the heavy one of justifying
ourselves and condemning others.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, John Colobos, 2 1 (PG 65,2 1 2)

How can we j udge another person without imprisoning that
person in his past acts? Without shackling him to one moment
of his development? A change of heart is always possible, even
'between the stirrup and the ground' in a fatal fall from a horse, to
quote the English proverb beloved of Graham Greene. Magistrates
must certainly j udge actions to maintain the social order, or at least
to lessen the disorder. But the Gospel limits their power and helps
them to find a balance between the common good and the mystery
of a personal destiny. In particular, if Christians must reject the death
penalty, it is not from an idolatrous sacralization of biological life,
but in order to leave a person the opportunity of repentance.
Remember this, and you will no longer judge: Judas was an apostle,
and the thief crucified at Christ's right hand was a murderer. What
a transformation in an instant!
jOHN CuMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, roth step, 4 ( 5 )
(p. 76)

The heart must purify itself in order to see God. ' Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God' (Matthew 5 . 8 ) . The criterion of
that purification is the clear and loving look that is able to discern
in each human being the person whom God calls, and for whom, as
Pascal says, he shed on the cross that particular drop of blood . . .
Then human criteria of pure and impure vanish, and even those of
right and wrong. Each person is basically good, having been created
by God, in the image of God, with the desire for God. And the fact
that this desire has gone wildly astray means that it does exist. It is
great sinners who 'soften up' best when touched by grace, according

The Difficult Love

283

to Peguy, and the Church has a special veneration for the good thief
and the repentant prostitute, or for St Mary of Egypt, the woman
who had been prodigal with her body but was suddenly carried off
by the call of the desert. All of us are the people who put Christ to
death, the daily executioners of love. And Christ loves us and, when
put to death by us, offers us resurrection.
Question: When is a person sure of having arrived at purity?
Answer: When he considers all human beings are good, and no
created thing appears impure or defiled to him. Then he is truly
pure in heart.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 8 5 {p. 3 4 0 1 )
I n this regard a l l human beings are equal, not with an equality
that is jealously measured, but because each one, being an image of
the Absolute, is himself an absolute. Existences which converge on
the infinite are equal in dignity.
Rejecting taboos and prohibitions, Jesus took his meals with tax
collectors and prostitutes, the better to express his love for them. To
love one whom others despise is to demonstrate God's love for that
person, for one who is more precious than the whole world. It is
perhaps to save that person from self-hatred.
We remember the great Western mystics who bestowed their
love on the most criminal or the most hopeless: Therese of Lisieux,
who begins her spiritual life by praying like a loving mother young girl as she is - for a murderer, and ends it by taking her
seat voluntarily 'at the table of sinners', undergoing the terrible
experience of contemporary nihilism, of the 'night of nothingness';
or Catherine of Siena assisting Nicholas Toldo on the scaffold, a
political prisoner condemned to death whom she had visited in
prison: ' I suddenly saw the God-Man as one sees the brightness
of the sun. His side was open and he was receiving the blood of
the executed man. In that blood there was the fire of the holy desire
that grace had given him and hidden in his soul.'
We remember the highest (and also popular) spirituality of the
Russians. Think of Dostoyevsky, Sonia's regard for Raskolnikov, the
ministry of the 'Siberian missionary' among the convicts, the respect
that the people showed for criminals . . .
When you give, give generously, your face lit up with joy. And
give more than you were asked for . . . Make no distinction be­
tween rich and poor. Do not try to find out who is worthy and

284

Approaches to Contemplation

who is not. Let all people be equal in your eyes. Thus you will be
able to influence even the unworthy for good . . . The Lord ate at
the table of the tax collectors and harlots. He did not keep the
unworthy at a distance. He wanted thus to draw all humankind to
himself. Therefore consider that all human beings, even if infidels
or murderers, are equal in worth and honour, and that each one of
them in virtue of his nature is your brother, even if, all unknowingly,
he has strayed far from the truth.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 23 ( p. 99)