because they were sated or because they wanted to experiment with
their freedom. This 'cooling down' of souls gave rise to materiality,
the consequence, not the cause, of the fall. In a system in which
many of the elements are alien to biblical revelation this cosmic
range of freedom is profoundly Christian. God by a second creation
fixed the worlds that had appeared in this way. For humanity he
stabilized the perceptible universe in which the incarnation reopens
to embodied souls the way to freedom. Except for the saints - and
they also with Christ himself are awaiting and preparing for the final
reintegration - souls after death pass through manifold 'aeons', states
of universal existence which are expressed in corresponding spiritual
states. Each soul is driven by a thirst for the absolute which only
God can satisfy. Gradually all creatures having come to appreciate
evil for what it is and being fundamentally dissatisfied will turn to
God and regain, consciously now, their original fullness: this will be
the apokatastasis, the 're-establishment' of all things.
Finally Origen is a mystic and we find in him almost all the
themes that will be developed by later spirituality: imitation of Christ
that becomes a sharing in his life; the liberation of freedom lost
through the passions; knowledge of God in the purified mirror of his
image; the necessity of 'discernment'; the alternation of 'refreshment'
and 'bitterness'; the interplay of presence and absence; the change
from the words of the Logos (the Old Testament) to his face (the
New Testament); apatheia making agape possible; the marriage of
the Logos with the soul within the marriage of Christ with the
Church, described in symbol in the Song of Songs; the pilgrimage
in the Spirit through the Logos to the Father; and most fundamental
of all, perhaps, the 'sharing in the godhead' through 'friendship with
God and communion with him'.
A certain number of Origenist theses were condemned by the
Fifth Ecumenical Council in 5 5 3 : the pre-existence of souls; bore­
dom as the cause of the fall; the denial of proper reality to the
material world; and universal salvation as the inevitable outcome
of a system. These are condemnations, not so much of Origen's
intuitions and hypotheses as of their systematization by Evagrius.
The highest spirituality of the Christian East took up the theme of
universal salvation not as a doctrine but as a hope and a prayer.
Against Celsus SC 1 3 2, 1 3 6, 1 47,1 50,227, English translation by H.
Chadwick, Cambridge 1 9 5 3 ; De Principiis SC 2 5 2, 2 5 3 ,268,269,
English translation by G.W. Butterworth, SPCK 1 9 3 6; On Prayer

GCS 3 , 297 - 403, English translation by J.T. O'Meara, ACW 1 9,

Biographical Notes

365

I 9 5 3 ; Letter to Gregory Thaurmaturgus PG I I , 8 8-92; Homilies:
On Genesis, On Leviticus and Numbers GCS 29; On Isaiah and
Ezekiel GCS 3 3 ; On Jeremiah SC 23 2, 2 3 8 ; On the Song of Songs

SC 3 7 bis, English translation by R.P. Lawson in ACW 26, I 9 5 7;
Commentary on the Gospel of Matthew SC I 62; Commentary on
the Gospel of john SC 1 20, I 5 7, 222; Fragments on the Psalms,
Proverbs, Ephesians, Colossians GCS 6

PACHOMIUS ( 2 8 7 - 3 47)
The founder of communitarian and hierarchically organized monas­
ticism, called 'cenobitic'.
Pachomius was born in Upper Egypt into a pagan family. At the
age of twenty he was sent, with others, under a strong escort to a
recruiting centre for the army. The Christians at Thebes were the
only people who gave any welcome or assistance to the exhausted
recruits. Their behaviour came as a revelation to Pachomius and he
resolved to imitate them. On his release he settled in a Christian
village, received instruction and was baptized. For seven years he
underwent an apprenticeship of ascesis and prayer with an old
hermit. One night an interior voice reminded Pachomius of his
vow to serve others. He built a few shelters with an enclosing
fence around them. Brothers came whom he served in the best
way that he could. But for lack of discipline disorder soon broke
out. Then Pachomius imposed a strict discipline on his monks in
the form of a Rule, written in Coptic and dictated, it was said, by
angels. A Pachomian monastery looked like a village surrounding
its church, and the monks who were mostly laymen were grouped
according to trades. Each 'house' had its own superior and all the
superiors obeyed Pachomius. Soon a cenobitic monastery for nuns
was organized near by, with his sister in charge.
Thus side by side with a purely charismatic monasticism, that of
solitaries, there appeared a communitarian monasticism in which the
basic aims were obedience and mutual service. St Basil was to make
it clear that such a monasticism bears witness primarily to apostolic
love on the model of the first Christian community, that of Jerusalem.
Communitarian monasticism is often regarded as a school in which
preparation is made for the perpetual prayer of solitude.
Sources in Pachomian Koinonia by A. Veilleux I 9 8o

366

Biographical Notes

PHILOTHEUS O F SINAI

He was the Superior, at an unknown date, of the monastery of Batos
in Mount Sinai. In the spiritual succession of St John Climacus he lays
the emphasis on the 'keeping of the commandments' and he attests
an already established use of the 'Jesus Prayer'.
Forty Texts on Watchfulness in the Philokalia, translated and edited
G.E.H. Palmer, P. Sherrard, Kallistos Ware, Vol 3 , 1 984; On Sobriety,
Philocalie des peres neptiques, Astir, Athens, pp. 274-286

PoLYCARP oF SMYRNA

According to the statements of Irenaeus, Polycarp sat at the feet of
the apostles themselves and they consecrated him bishop of Smyrna.
Ignatius of Antioch addressed one of his letters to him. In 1 5 5 he
went to Rome to discuss the date of Easter with the bishop of that
city. They reached no conclusion, but their talks were held in amity
and mutual esteem. Shortly after his return he was arrested. He
refused to curse Christ - 'For eighty six years I have been serving
him . . . How could I blaspheme my King and Saviour?' - and
he was burnt at the stake. We possess a description of that event
written by an eye-witness in the form of a letter from the faithful
of his church to another church of Asia Minor. It is a narrative
that shows us this bishop's profound tranquillity, his 'love for his
enemies', his determination to imitate Christ in total simplicity, and
to be united with him in his sacrifice.
The Martyrdom of Polycarp SC 1 0, 242 with the Letters of Ignatius

of Antioch.

RABULAS OF EDESSA

A Syrian theologian and hymn-writer, perhaps the a uthor of the
translation of the New Testament into Syriac. He was a pagan,
converted about 400, and in 4 1 2 he became bishop of Edessa.
At the Council of Edessa he joined the 'orientals' led by John of
Antioch but soon rallied to Cyril of Alexandria. He played a part

Biographical Notes

367

in the negotiations that ended in the agreement of 4 3 3 . He fought
the Nestorians who were influential in the school at Edessa. The
authenticity of his hymns is contested.
Hymn to the Martyrs Bickell II, p. 262-263