The Trinitarian revelation is implicit also in the prayer which
Christ himself taught us, the Lord's Prayer, of which the first three
petitions invoke the three divine Persons. For the Son is the Father's
eternal Name, which he hallowed to the point of death on a cross.
And the Kingdom is identified with the Spirit, who is therefore both
the unction of the Son and the Kingdom of the Father, as Paul
Florensky observed.
Our Father, who art in heaven,
Hallowed be thy name.
Thy Kingdom come.
By these words the Lord is teaching those who pray to begin
with the very mystery of God . . . The words of the prayer really
point to the Father, the Father's name, and the Kingdom, to teach
us . . . to honour, to call upon and to adore the One Trinity. For
the name of God the Father, in its essential subsistence, is the
only-begotten Son. And the Kingdom of God the Father, in its
essential subsistence, is the Holy Spirit. For what Matthew calls
'Kingdom' another evangelist calls Holy Spirit: 'Thy Spirit come
. . .' [Luke 1 1 . 2, variant reading].
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Commentary on the Lord's Prayer (PG
9 0,8 8 4 )

Thus the Trinity constitutes the inexhaustible fruitfulness of the
Unity. From the Trinity comes all unification and all differentiation.

God: Unity and Difference

63

That is so, despite the fact that - as Dionysius insists elsewhere
(Divine Names, II, u ) - unity, in God, is always stronger than
distinctions, so that 'distinctions remain indivisible and unified'.
God, the divine Origin, is praised in holiness:
whether as Unity, on account of the character of simplicity
and unity proper to this Indivisible whose unifying power unifies us
ourselves and assembles our different natures in order to lead us to足
gether . . . to that unification which is modelled on God himself;
or as Trinity, because of the thrice personal manifestation of
this superessential fruitfulness whence all fatherhood in heaven and
on earth receives its being and its name;
or as Love for man, because . . . the godhead has been fully
imparted to our nature by one of its Persons calling humanity and
raising it to himself, for Jesus mysteriously took flesh, and the
eternal was thus introduced into time and by his birth penetrated
the utmost depths of our nature.
D IONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, l,4 (PG 3 , 5 9 2 )

One text from St Paul was tirelessly commented on by early
Christian theologians. That is the passage in the Epistle to the
Ephesians: 'One God and Father of us all, who is above all and
through all and in all' (Ephesians 4.6). The Father is God beyond
all, the origin of all that is. The incarnate Son is God with us, and
he who becomes incarnate is none other than the Logos who gives
form to the world by his creative words. The Spirit is God in us, the
Breath, the Pneuma, who gives life to all and brings every object to its
proper perfection. The Logos appears as order and I ntelligibility, the
Pneuma as dynamism and life. Thus, as Maximus the Confessor said
later, to contemplate the smallest object is to experience the Trinity:
the very being of the object takes us back to the Father; the meaning
it expresses, its logos, speaks to us of the Logos; its growth to fullness
and beauty reveals the Breath, the Life-giver.
Over all, the Father; and he is the head of Christ.
Through all, the Word; and he is the head of the Church.
In all the Spirit; and he is the living water given by the Lord
to those who believe in him, love him, and know that there is only
'one God and Father of us all, who is above all and through all
and in all'.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, V, 1 8,2 (SC 1 5 3 ,

p.

240)

64

Understanding the Mysteries

The Father makes all things by the Word in the Spirit. So it is that
the Unity of the Trinity is safeguarded. So it is that in the Church
is proclaimed the one God who is 'above all and through all and
in all' (Ephesians 4.6). He is 'above all' as Father, as author and
source; 'through all' by the Word; 'in all' in the Holy Spirit.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA Letters to Serapion, 1,28 (PG 26,596)

The Blessed Trinity is indivisible and enjoys Unity in regard to itself.
You say 'the Father'. His Word is equally present; also the Spirit,
who is in the Son.
You say 'the Son'. Now the Father is in the Son, and the
Spirit is not external to the Word.
There is only one grace coming from the Father through the
Son, and fulfilled in the Holy Spirit.
There is only one godhead . . . and there is only one God who
is beyond all and through all and in all.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA Letters to Serapion, l, 1 4 (PG 26,565)

St Basil in his Treatise on the Holy Spirit takes up this theme
and links it with the passage in the psalm where the Son and the
Spirit are described as the Word and the Breath of the Lord. The
Breath carries the Word and enables it to find utterance; the Word
makes the silence of the Breath heard, that silence of which Isaac the
Syrian used to say that it is the 'mystery of the world to come'.
The Father is the origin of all, the Son realizes, and the Spirit
fulfils. Everything subsists by the will of the Father, comes into
being through the action of the Son, and reaches its perfection
through the action of the Holy Spirit . . . 'By the word of the Lord
the heavens were made, and all their host by the breath of his mouth'
(Psalm 3 3 .6). This refers . . . to the Word who was with God in the
beginning, who is God. As for 'the breath of his mouth', this is
'the Spirit of truth, who proceeds from the Father' (John 1 5 .26).
The number three therefore comes to your mind: the Lord who
cominands, the Word who creates, the Breath who confirms. And
what can it mean to confirm, if not to make perfect in holiness?
BASIL OF CtESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 1 6 (PG 3 2, 1 3 6)

Gregory Nazianzen speaks of the Trinity as the unmoving move足
ment of the One who neither remains imprisoned in his own solitude,

God: Unity and Difference

65

nor spreads himself indefinitely; for God is communion, not imper足
sonal diffusion. The very fullness of the One demands the presence
in him of the Other; an Other who in absolute terms can only
be within the One and equal to him in infinity. But these two
are not opposed or combined in any mathematical way. For the
Third, who is Other but not Other, enables the fullness of Unity
to contain unending diversity without opposition; a bsolute differen足
tiation coexists with absolute unity.
The One enters into movement because of his fullness.
The Two is transcended because the godhead is beyond all
opposition.
Perfection is achieved in the Three who is the first to overcome
the compositeness of the Two.
Thus the godhead does not remain confined, nor does it spread
out indefinitely.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 23,8 (PG 3 5, I I 6o)