which is wholly light, and whose brightness is unceasing . . . It is the
sun that enlightens everything and pours out upon the whole visible
world the brightness of its rays . . . It is the sun that allows bodies to
develop, bestows life on them, purifies and renews them . . . And
just as Goodness moves all things, and just as God the Creator
gathers together all things that are scattered, turning them towards
himself as their source and centre and perfect fulfilment; and as
according to the Scriptures everything receives from the Good
its structure and existence . . . and as every object finds its own
proper borders in the Good and all objects aim at the Good the intelligent by way of knowledge, the sensible by way of the
feelings, the merely animate by natural instinct, the inanimate
by their simple share in existence - so, likewise, the light uses
its property of revelation through images to gather together and
draw to itself . . . everything that receives its rays. That is why
it is called 'sun' [helios] because everything is gathered together
[aolles] in the light and the light reunites what has been scattered.
It is towards this light that all perceptible realities are tending . . .
I am certainly not asserting in the manner of the ancients that
the sun actually governs the visible world as god and maker
of the universe. But since the creation of the world, the invis­
ible mysteries of God, thanks to his eternal power and godhead,
are grasped by the intellect through creatures. (cf. Romans 1 .20 )
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, IV,4 (PG J ,69?-?00)

The angels are the mediators of glory, ministers of this symbolic
structure of created being. Perceiving their presence we learn to
fathom the depth of nature and its belonging to another world, its
being rooted in God:
Angels, bearers of the Divine Silence,
Lights of revelation set by the Inaccessible
to reveal him on the very threshold of his sanctuary.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, IV,2 (PG 3 , 696)

Interior freedom - apatheia - makes possible that attentive gaze,
stripped of covetousness, which perceives the outward appearance of
each object and its secret, and honours it. Claudel must be quoted
here: 'A pure eye and a fixed gaze see every object becoming trans­
parent in front of them' (La Ville) 'Only a soul that has been made
pure will understand the fragrance of the rose' (L'oiseau nair dans
le solei/ levant). And his allusion to Japanese art is pertinent because,

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

223

let us repeat, the 'contemplation of nature' makes it possible to
accommodate in the 'barque' of the Church, in its memory, the
experiences of the cultures that are fed by a cosmic symbolism: 'All
the art of the old Japanese painters (who in almost all periods were
monks) is explained if it is understood that, for them, the visible
world was a perpetual allusion to Wisdom, like that great tree which,
with unutterable majesty, says No to evil for us' (ibid.) .
Wisdom consists in seeing every object i n accordance with its true
nature, with perfect interior freedom.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, 11,64 (PG 90,420)

Here is a little spiritual exercise: by means of the humblest of
sensations - of breathing, of rejoicing under the blue sky, of touching
a stone, or the bark of a tree, of gazing, as Claude! or Heidegger
would say, at the majesty of a tree - I try to reach the transcendence
of a thing. The object is visible and at the same time invisible; I m ust
seek its inner self, let myself be led by it.
We may gain some inkling of what God is if we attempt by means
of every sensation to reach the reality of each creature, not giving
up until we are alive to what transcends it . . .
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA Miscellanies, V,XI (PG 9,1 1 2)

The aim of the exercise becomes more specific: the mystery of
the object, progressively laid bare, leads us to Christ. The Word, by
becoming incarnate, has reopened for us the paradisial dimension of
the world. Opaque but transparent, the earth is the paradise which
we can re-enter by dying and rising with Christ.
By meditation . . . we are no longer considering the physical
properties of an object, its dimensions, its thickness, length or
breadth. What is left from now on is only a sign, a unity
provided, if I may so put it, with a position . . . Beyond, we
discover the immensity of Christ, and there, by means of his
holiness, we advance toward the depth of his infinity until we
glimpse the Almighty . . . The grace of understanding comes to
us from God through his Son. Solomon bears eloquent witness
to that when he says: ' I have not the understanding of a man
. . . Every word of God proves true . . . Do not add to his words'
(Proverbs 3 0. 2 & s-6). Moses also calls Wisdom by the symbolic
name 'tree of life' (Genesis 2.9) and it was planted in paradise.

224

Approaches to Contemplation

But is not this paradise also the world in which are all the
elements of creation? There the Word was made flesh; there he
flowered and bore fruit; there he has given life to those who taste
of his goodness.
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA Miscellanies, V,XI (PG 9,109)

So it is that a person in whom all the strength of the passions
has been crucified and transfigured radiates the peace of paradise.
Around him wild beasts are calm, and human beings also, who can
sometimes be wild beasts. In truth he is another Orpheus, like the
young Christ of the Mausoleum of Galla Placida at Ravenna.
The humble man confronts murderous wild beasts. From the
moment they see him their savagery is tamed, they approach
him as if he were their owner, nodding their heads and lick­
ing his hands and feet. They actually scent coming from him
the fragrance that Adam breathed forth before the Fall when
they came to him in paradise and he gave them their names.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 20 (Spanos, p. 7 8 )

For such a person the beauty of the body no longer arouses lust,
but rather praise.
Someone, I was told, at the sight of a very beautiful body [a
woman's] felt impelled to glorify the Creator. The sight of it
increased his love for God to the point of tears. Anyone who
entertains such feelings in such circumstances is already risen . . .
before the general resurrection.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 1 5th step, 5 8 (p. 1 68 )

I f objects give u s a n inkling o f God, then drawing near t o God
we can receive the full revelation of their logoi, their spiritual natures,
their infinite meanings. The Logos is the divine subject of all logoi, of
all the subsistent 'words' that support the world. The logikos man,
personal image of the Logos, is called to become their human subject.
The meeting is fully brought about in the God-Man who enables us to
fathom the spiritual essences of objects, not in order to possess but in
order to offer them to the Logos after having 'given them their names',
marked them with our own creative spirit. The world then becomes a
momentous dialogue between the Logos and the logikos man. ( It is
also necessarily a dialogue of human beings among themselves, since
they exist as persons only according to their relationship with one

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

225