In the account of the martydom of Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna,
in the same period, one is struck by the affectionate simplicity
of the man and the power of his intercession. He welcomes the
police officers as neighbours sent to him by God. He does not
pray for himself but for all those whom he has met, good or bad,
and for the universal Church.
Since his conscience is involved, the martyr deliberately disobeys
the authorities. He calmly proclaims before magistrates and crowd

Enstasy - Ecstasy

261

that the only 'Lord' is Christ, namely God-made-man, and not the
holder of power, not the sacralized might of Rome. Thereby he asserts
the transcendence of conscience, of the person made in the image
of God. He makes his own the protest of Antigone and Socrates,
but in the joy of the resurrection. He radically relativizes political
importance.
For all that, the martyr is not a rebel. Like Socrates, he accepts
the sentence of the magistrates and prays for the Emperor. By that
very fact he is a blessing to the city of men, and without disrupting
it he enriches it with an uncompromising freedom.
The end of the passage takes up again the identification of
martyrdom with the Eucharist, the witness of victory over death.
Learning then that the police officers were there, he [Polycarp] went
down and talked to them. They were amazed at his age and his
calmness and at the trouble that was being taken to arrest a man
as old as he. He had served them with as much food and drink as
they wished, asking them only for an hour to pray as he desired.
They allowed him that, and standing upright he began to pray,
so full of God's grace that for two hours he could not stop, and
those who heard him were astonished, and many repented of having
come to arrest so holy an old man.
In his prayer he remembered all the people he had ever met, il­
lustrious or obscure, and the whole catholic Church spread through­
out the world. When he had finished, the hour having come to
depart, they mounted him on an ass and took him to the city . . .
Quickly they piled round him the materials prepared for the pyre.
As they were about to nail him to it he said, 'Leave me like this.
He who gives me strength to endure the fire will also enable me
to remain firm at the stake.' Accordingly they did not nail him to
it, but they bound him. With his hands behind his back he looked
like a ram chosen for sacrifice from a large flock . . .
Raising his eyes to heaven he said:
'Lord, almighty God, Father of thy well-beloved and blessed
Son Jesus Christ through whom we have received the knowledge
of thy name, God . . . of all creation . . . I bless thee for having
judged me worthy of this day and of this hour, to share among
the number of thy martyrs in the chalice of thy Christ, looking
for the resurrection of body and soul in the fullness of the Holy
Spirit . . . And so for everything I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify
thee, through the eternal heavenly high priest Jesus Christ thy
well-beloved Son, through whom be glory to thee with him and

262

Approaches to Contemplation

the Holy Spirit, now and for ever. Amen.' . . . In the midst of the
fire he stood, not like burning flesh, but like bread baking.
Martyrdom of St Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna, 7,2-8 , I ; J 4,I-J ; 1 5,2
(SC I O, pp. 2 50,25 2,260,262,264)

The following dreams, which are visions, show the souls of the
martyrs taking part in the heavenly liturgy as it is described in the
Apocalypse. The gardens of paradise with the leaves of the trees
singing to the breeze of the Spirit, a temple or a palace with walls of
light; at the centre of it all, the Ancient of Days with white hair but
a face radiating youth; the face of Christ in the youthfulness of the
Spirit; the kiss of peace; the mouthful of food offered by the Shepherd;
the ineffa ble perfume that is as food; so many symbols of the mystical
state of martyrdom similar to the actual experience of the Eucharist.
Perpetua's Vision

Then I went up. I saw an enormous garden. In the middle there was
a tall man dressed as a shepherd. He was engaged in milking sheep.
Around him, in thousands, were men clothed in white. He raised
his head, looked at me and said, 'Welcome, my child.' He called me
and gave me a mouthful of the cheese he was preparing. I received
it with hands joined. I ate it and they all said 'Amen'. At the sound
of the voices I woke up with the taste of a strange sweetness in my
mouth. I related this vision at once to my brother [Saturus] and we
understood that it was martyrdom that awaited us.
Saturus's Vision

Our martyrdom was over. We had left our bodies behind. Four
angels carried us towards the East but their hands did not touch
us . . . When we had gone through the first sphere that encircles
the earth we saw a great light. Then I said to Perpetua who was at
my side, 'This is what the Lord has promised us.' We had reached
a vast open plain that seemed to be a garden with oleanders and
every type of flower. The trees were as tall as cypresses and their
leaves sang without ceasing . . . We arrive at a palace whose walls
seem to be made of light. We go in and hear a choir repeating,
'Holy, Holy, Holy.' In the hall. is seated a man clothed in white.
He has a youthful face and his hair shines white as snow. On either
side of him stand four elders . . . We go forward in amazement and
we kiss the Lord who caresses us with his hand. The elders say to

Enstasy - Ecstasy

263

us, 'Stand up!' We obey and exchange the kiss of peace . . . We
recognized many of the brethren martyrs like us. For food we all
had an ineffable perfume that satisfied us wholly.
Martyrdom of Felicity and Perpetua (Knopf-Kriiger)
6.

Deification

The whole of this transformation of the h uman being is summed
up by the Fathers in the celebrated formula, 'God became man
in order that man might become God'. In order, that is, for him
to share through grace in the divine nature, as the Second Epistle
of the apostle Peter says ( 1 .4).
This formula does not in any way imply the removal of the
human element. On the contrary, it foreshadows its fullness in Christ
who is true God and true man. The human part is given life by the
Spirit. 'God became the bearer of flesh,' says Athanasius, 'in order
that man might become bearer of the Spirit' ( On the Incarnation,
8).
The human being i s truly human only i n God. The Word,
incarnate, crucified, glorified, constitutes the place of resurrection,
the Pentecostal place where humanity is raised up towards God.
Because God has become man, man can become God. He rises
by divine steps corresponding to those by which God humbled
himself out of love for men, taking on himself without any change
in himself the worst of our condition.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Theological and Economic Chapters
(PG 90, 1 1 6 5 )