We c a n see the essentials o f the commandments in the sober and
practical arrangement of the Benedictine Rule. In every line we find
the example and the words of jesus, whether he is taking up an
Old Testament commandment and illuminating it or delivering the
Sermon on the Mount or the parable of the Last Judgment in
the twenty-fifth chapter of St Matthew's Gospel: 'I was hungry
and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I
was a stranger and you welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed
me, I was sick and you visited me, I was in prison and you came to
me . . . as you did it to one of the least of these my brethren, you
did to me' ( Matthew 2 5 . 3 9-40).
The monk becomes little by little a centre of blessing. His trust
in God's infinite mercy enables him to hope. Knowing himself to

138

Initiation for Warfare

be fundamentally loved, he feels himself not only able but obliged
to serve his neighbour and love his enemy. The fear of God is the
discovery someone makes who is terrified by the realization that to be
completely identified with this world is to be lost in a false existence.
Meditation on hell enables us to understand from what Christ came
to save us, provided we cling with all our strength to his salvation.
( Certain themes such as the systematic repression of negative
thoughts will be studied in the fourth chapter of this part.)
What are the rules for living a good life?
In the first place to love the Lord with all one's heart, with all one's
soul and with all one's strength.
Then to love one's neighbour as oneself.
Then not to kill.
Not to commit adultery.
Not to steal.
Not to covet.
Not to bear false witness.
To respect all people.
And not to do to others what one would not wish to have done to
oneself.
To deny oneself in order to follow Christ.
To be mastrr of one's own body . . .
To help the poor.
To clothe the naked.
To visit the sick.
To bury the dead.
To assist those in distress.
To console the afflicted . . .
Not to let anything come before the love of Christ.
Not to give rein to one's wrath.
Not to meditate revenge.
Not to harbour deceit in one's heart.
Not to offer a pretended peace.
Not to forsake charity.
Not to swear, for fear of perjury.
To speak the truth from heart and mouth.
Not to render evil for evil.
Not to commit injustice but to bear patiently what is done to
oneself.
To love one's enemies.
Not to render cursing for cursing, but rather blessing.

The Interior Combat

1 39

To endure persecution for righteousness' sake . . .
To place one's hope in God.
If one sees any good in oneself, to ascribe it to God, not to
oneself.
To fear the day of judgment.
To dread hell.
To desire eternal life with all one's heart and soul.
Every day to keep death present before one's eyes . . .
Not to hate anyone.
Not to entertain jealousy.
Not to give oneself up to envy . . .
To respect the aged.
To love the young.
In the love of Christ to pray for one's enemies.
After a disagreement, to make peace before the sun goes down.
And never to despair of God's mercy.
Such are the tools of the spiritual art.
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, IV (Centenario, pp. 20-6)

Diadochus of Photike, a great bishop, both a h umanist and a
contemplative, offers a more condensed form of the 'keeping of the
commandments'. The path goes from faith to love by way of hope,
detachment, humility, respect for others, and chastity, meaning the
integrity of spirit that makes it possible to integrate the whole being
in love.
First definition: faith. A thought about God free of idolatry.
Second definition: hope. A loving pilgrimage of the spirit towards
what is hoped for.
Third definition: patience. Ceaseless perseverance in seeing with the
inner eye the Invisible as if it were visible.
Fourth definition: absence of avarice. To be as eager not to possess
as people usually are to possess.
Fifth definition: knowledge. To disregard oneself in the effort to
ascend to God.
Sixth definition: humility. Never thinking about what one deserves.
Seventh definition: absence of irascibility. The ability to avoid anger.
Eighth definition: integrity (or interior chastity). The inward sense
constantly united to God.
Ninth definition: love. An increased friendliness towards those who
insult us.

1 40

Initiation for Warfare

Tenth definition: total transformation. In the enjoyment of God
the anguish of death becomes joy.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, Preamble (SC 5 his,
84-5 )

Maximus the Confessor emphasizes that the 'keeping o f the
commandments' makes it possible to overcome the spirit of ag­
gression and greed, and consequently to enlighten the vital force
(the thumos) and desire (the epithumia).
The believer is seized with a holy trembling.
Whoever believes thus finds humility.
Whoever finds humility receives gentleness,
and thus overcomes the influence of unnatural aggressiOn and
covetousness.
Whoever is gentle keeps the commandments.
Whoever keeps the commandments is purified.
Whoever is purified is enlightened.
That person is judged worthy to enter with the Word into the
nuptial chamber of the mysteries.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Theological Chapters, r 6 (PG 9o, r o89)

Ascesis requires discernment. To move from the blessings of this
life, which are fundamentally good, to a radical demand to go beyond
them, we must first have become aware of a higher perfection, and
have received a pledge of God's 'sweetness' (even if later he has to
withdraw it and ask us to go through the desert places) . Lacking
this discernment, ascesis is apt to be self-interested or Pharisaical,
in danger of withering purposelessly between earth and heaven.
To eat and drink with thanksgiving to God all that is served up or
prepared for one is not in any way opposed to the rule of knowledge.
For 'everything is very good' (Genesis I.J I ) .
But voluntarily to abstain from what i s agreeable and abundant
is a sign of great discernment and higher knowledge. We do not
readily despise the delights of this life if we do not taste with
complete satisfaction the sweetness of God.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 44 (SC 5 his,
pp. I IO-I I )

The whole o f praxis is symbolized by the fast, provided that this
includes spiritual as well as bodily fasting, as the Fathers teach. In

The Interior Combat

141