We have said that the 'descent' into the heart corresponds to Moses's
'ascent' of Sinai. Moses penetrated then into the darkness where God
was. Likewise we, in so far as we are personal existence in relation­
ship, by going beyond any vision of the mind or the body, penetrate
into the divine Darkness. It is the symbol and the experience of a pres­
ence that cannot be grasped, a night in which the Inaccessible presents
himself and eludes us at the same time. It is the nocturnal communion
of the hidden God with the person who is hidden in God.
This darkness does not deny the glory that flows from it. It is
not the absence of light: rather it is 'more than luminous'. Or again,
coincidentia oppositorum, the coincidence of opposites (which in
their very unity remain opposites): the darkness is simultaneously
both the brightest light, dark through excess of brightness, and the
blackest obscurity because it is 'transluminous'.
Likewise the darkness does not deny the Word but reaches the
Silence in the very heart of the Word.
The divine darkness is entered by 'closing the eyes', that is by
renouncing a gaze that is diffusive, objectifying, possessive, and
by learning to look inward - or simply with the eyes shut, as
in the state of loving abandon.
At first the revelation of God to Moses is made in light. Then God
speaks to him in the cloud. Finally, by climbing up higher, Moses
contemplates God in the darkness.
See what we learn from this. The passage from darkness to
light is the initial separation from lying and erroneous views about
God.
The more attentive awareness of hidden objects, guiding the
soul by means of visible things to invisible reality, is like a
cloud obscuring the whole perceptible world, leading the soul
and accustoming it to the contemplation of what is hidden.
Finally the soul, which has travelled by these ways towards
the things that are above and has abandoned everything that is
accessible to human nature, penetrates into the sanctuary of the
knowledge of God that is wrapped on all sides in darkness. There,
as everything perceptible and intelligible has been left outside, there
remains for the soul's contemplation only what cannot be grasped
by the intellect. It is there that God dwells according to the words of
Scripture: 'Moses drew near to the thick darkness' (Exodus 20.21).
GREGORY O F NYSSA Life of Moses (PG 44,3 76-7)

Enstasy - Ecstasy

24 7

Superessential Trinity, more than divine and more than good,
thou that presidest over divine Christian wisdom, lead us not
only beyond all light, but even beyond unknowing, up to the
highest peak of the mystical Scriptures, to the place where the
simple and absolute and incorruptible mysteries of the godhead
are revealed, in the more-than-luminous darkness of the Silence.
For it is in that Silence that we learn the secrets of the Darkness
that shines with the brightest light in the bosom of the blackest
obscurity and, while remaining itself utterly intangible and utterly
invisible, fills with a brightness more beautiful than beauty the
minds that know how to shut their eyes.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Mystical Theology, I, I (PG 3,997)
Darkness indicates the ultimate meeting, when the human being,
in a state of ontological poverty, becomes pure movement towards
God, who comes down infinitely lower than his own transcend­
ent state, retaining nothing of himself but the poverty of love. All
'essence' is surpassed, by God in a 'trans-descent', by the human being
in a 'trans-ascent'. There is now only an inexpressible communion of
persons.
Exercise yourself unceasingly in mystical contemplation; abandon
feelings; renounce intellectual activities; reject all that belongs to the
perceptible and the intelligible; strip yourself totally of non-being
and being and lift yourself as far as you are able to the point of
being united in unknowing with him who is beyond all being and
all knowledge. For it is by passing beyond everything, yourself
included, irresistibly and completely, that you will be exalted in pure
ecstasy right up to the dark splendour of the divine Superessence,
after having abandoned all, and stripped yourself of everything.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Mystical Theology, I, I (PG 3 ,
997- 1 000)

Instead of speaking of darkness it is equally possible to speak
of light, provided that we specify that it is uncreated light issuing
inexhaustibly from the Inaccessible. It is more-than-dark light from
the hidden God that makes it possible to share in him: energy of the
essence that comes from the Father through the Son in the Holy Spirit.
Light like this is inseparable from fire. The chariot by which a
person speeds into glory is a heart on fire. (In Jewish mysticism also

24 8

Approaches to Contemplation

one finds this identification of the burning heart with the chariot of
fire by which the prophet Elijah was taken up.) As the icons suggest,
the whole person becomes vision, filled with the light that issues
from the face of the transfigured Christ. The 'food of the Spirit'
and the 'water of life' refer to the inner content of the 'mysteries' mysteries of the Name of Jesus, of Scripture, of the Eucharist, of the
baptismal garment of light. To enter into the inner content of these
mysteries is to find immortal life already here below.
If you have become the throne of God, and the heavenly driver
has used you for his chariot, and your whole soul has become
spiritual vision and total light, if you have been fed on the food
of the Spirit, if you have drunk the water of life and put on the
garments of indescribable light, if your inner personality has been
established in the experience and the perfection of all these things,
then indeed you are truly living eternal life.
Pswoo-MACARIUS First Homily, 1 2 (PG 34,4 6 1 )

Like the strange 'living creatures' (cosmic and angelic) in
Ezekiel's vision the soul becomes all eye, meaning pure translucence.
(According to the ancients the eye could only see because it was itself
light.) The soul is filled with the light of Christ, such light as can
almost be identified with the Holy Spirit. All eye, and so all face - a
sign at once of the meeting with God who for us has given expression
to himself, and of an unbounded welcome for one's neighbour.
The soul that has been judged worthy to share in the Spirit in
his light, and has been illumined by the splendour of his ineffable
glory becomes all light, all face, all eye, and no part of it remains
any longer that is not filled with spiritual eyes and light. That means
that it has no longer anything dark about it but is wholly Spirit and
light. It is full of eyes, no longer having a reverse side but showing
a face all round, for the indescribable beauty of Christ's glory and
light have come to dwell in it. In the same way as the sun is the
same all round and does not have any reverse side or lower part
but is wholly and completely resplendent with its light . . . so the
soul that has been illumined with the ineffable beauty and the
glorious brightness of Christ's face and has been filled with the Holy
Spirit, the soul that has been found worthy to become the dwelling
and the temple of God, is all eye, all light, all face, all glory and all
Spirit, since Christ is adorning it in this way, moving it, directing it,

24 9

Enstasy - Ecstasy

upholding it and guiding it, thus enlightening it and embellishing it
with spiritual beauty.
Pswoo-MACARIUS First Homily,

2.

(PG 3 4,4 5 1 )