shadows of everyday routine. The vision becomes again something
to be waited for. But hope has taken the place of despair.
This realism with its tragic overtones was to leave its mark on
the West. It would prevent it from falling asleep on its way back
to the original. It would make it a pilgrim to the ultimate.
I sought the substance [of God] in myself, as if it were similar
to what I am; and I did not find it.
I sense then that God is well beyond my soul. To touch him
then, 'I pondered on these things and I stretched out my soul above
itself'. How in fact could my soul reach what it needs to look for
beyond itself if it did not stretch out above itself ? If my soul were
to remain within itself it would not see anything but itself and,
within itself, it would not see its God . . . 'I stretched out my soul
beyond myself ' and only my God remains for me to grasp. It is
there, in fact, above my soul, that the dwelling of my God is. That
is where he dwells, from there he sees me, from there he created
me . . . from there he raises me up and calls me, from there he
guides me and steers me into harbour.
He who dwells in the highest heavens in an invisible abode
possesses also a tabernacle on earth. His tabernacle is his Church
still on its journey. It is there he must be sought because in the
tabernacle ic; found the way that leads to his abode. Actually when
I stretched out my soul above myself to reach my God, why did I
do it? 'Because I will enter into the place of the tabernacle', the
marvellous tabernacle, even to the house of God . . . The tabernacle
of God on earth is made up of faithful people . . . The prophet
[David] entered the tabernacle and from there arrived at the house
of God. While he was marvelling at the saints, who are as it were
different parts of this tabernacle, he was led to the house of God,
carried away by a certain delight, a kind of secret charm, as though
from the house of God were coming the bewitching sounds of a
musical instrument. He walked in the tabernacle and hearing this
music within, whose sweetness drew him on, he set himself to
follow what he heard . . . and he arrived at the house of God
. . . How did you come to the secret of that abode? The reply:
amidst songs of gladness and praise, amidst the joyful harmonies
of the holiday-makers . . . in the house of God it is always a
holiday . . . it is celebrated by the choirs of angels, and the face
of God, seen unveiled, gives rise to a joy beyond description.
There is no beginning to that day of festival, nor any end. Of
this eternal festivity some ineffable sound is heard in the ears

Enstasy - Ecstasy

235

of the heart, provided that no human noise is mixed with it.
The harmony of that festival enchants the ear of anyone who
is walking in this tabernacle and contemplating the marvels that
God has worked for the redemption of the faithful. It leads the
hart to the waterbrooks.
But we see God from a distance. Our body that is doomed
to corruption weighs our soul down and our spirit is troubled by
many thoughts. Sometimes, spurred on by the longing that scatters
the vain images that surround us, we succeed in hearing those divine
sounds . . . However, since we are weighed down by our heaviness
we soon fall back into our habitual ways. We let ourselves be
dragged back to our usual way of living. And just as when we
drew near to God we found joy, so when we fall back to earth
we have reason to groan. 'Why art thou so heavy, 0 my soul: and
why art thou so disquieted within me?' We have just tasted a secret
sweetness, we have just been able with the fine point of the spirit to
glimpse, very briefly, it is true, and in a flash only, the life that does
not change. Why then are you still distressed? Why this sadness?
You do not doubt your God. You are not at a loss for an answer
to those who ask you, 'Where is your God?' Already I have had a
foretaste of the immutable. Why are you still distressed? Hope in
God. And the soul replies in secret: 'Why am I in distress, unless
it is because I am not yet in that abode where this sweetness into
whose bosom I was fleetingly transported is for ever enjoyed? Can
I perhaps from now on drink from this fountain without fear? . . .
Am I even now secure against all my inordinate desires? Are they
tamed and vanquished? Is not the devil, my enemy, on the watch
for me? And you would have me untroubled while I am still exiled
from God's house!' Then . . . the reply comes: 'Hope in God. While
awaiting heaven find your God here below in hope . . . Why hope?
Because I shall witness to him. What witness will you give? That he
is my God, the health of my countenance. My health cannot come
to me from myself. I will proclaim it, I will bear witness to it: My
God is the health of my countenance . . .
'

AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Commentary on Psalm

4I

(PL 3 6,464-7)

In the contemplative life there is a great straining of the soul
when it is lifting itself towards the heavenly heights, endeavour­
ing to transcend all that it can see with the body, and pulling
itself together in order to expand. Sometimes it is victorious and
overcomes the resistance of the darkness of its own blindness.
Then it attains, briefly and in a covert manner, something of

Approaches to Contemplation

236

the light that knows no bounds. Yet it quickly falls back into
itself, and quits that light, repulsed, and returns with sighs to the
darkness of its own blindness.
GREGORY THE GREAT Homilies on Ezekiel, 2,2, I 2 (PL 76,9 5 5 )

S t Gregory o f Nyssa also, the poet and dramatist o f dark­
ness, mentions those brief thoughts that come to us from a fullness
beyond our reach. Beyond our reach, yes, but 'a few drops of
night' are enough to inebriate us.
The advantage you will gain from having welcomed me and enabled
me to dwell in you will be the dew with which my head is covered
and the drops of night that trickle from my locks . . .
Let whoever has gained access to the invisible sanctuary re­
joice if its fullness sprinkles his spirit with dark insubstantial
thoughts.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Song of Songs, I I (PG 44,
I002)

To catch a glimpse of the divine light as if through a narrow
loophole is none the less to broaden the soul prodigiously. A gleam
is enough for everything to be transformed.
In the splayed windows [of the temple in Ezekiel's vision] the part
by which the light enters is only a narrow opening, but the interior
part that receives the light is wide. In the same way the souls of
those who contemplate see only a feeble gleam of true light and
yet everything in them seems to expand widely . . . What they
see of eternity in their contemplation is almost nothing, yet it
is enough to broaden their inward vision and to increase their
fervour and their love. Although they are receiving the light of
truth as if through a loophole only, everything in them seems to
be broadened.
J

GREGORY THE GREAT Homilies on Ezekiel, 2, 5,I7 (PL 7 6,99 5 )