The 'circular motion' mentioned by Dionysius the Areopagite
symbolizes and facilitates the soul's concentration and its unification
in ecstasy. This description tallies with the suppliant posture of Elijah
referred to in the Bible, and resulted in one of the positions for the
'prayer of Jesus': sitting on a low stool, the person praying bows low
with his face between his knees.
When he rises again his soul expands in a 'spiral motion' through
the outflow of the divine glory. Then by a 'longitudinal motion' he is
accessible to all creation, which appears to him as a body of symbols,
a theophany.
The soul moves with a circular motion when it enters into itself
and turns away from the outside world; when it gathers together
its capacities of understanding, and unifies them in a concentra­
tion that saves it from all bewilderment; when it distances itself
from the multiplicity of external objects, so as to concentrate
on itself. When it has reached interior unity . . . it is led to­
wards the Beautiful-and-Good . . .
The soul moves with a spiral motion, in so far as it is enlight­
ened, in a way appropriate to it, by divine knowledge.
Its motion finally is longitudinal when, rather than return into
itself and aim at spiritual union (for then as we have just seen its
motion is circular), it turns towards the things around it, and
relies upon the outer world as on a complex body of symbols,
in order to rise to contemplation.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, IV,9 (PG 3,705)

On Prayer

1 99

Sometimes physical solitude is needed where nature itself be­
comes prayer - on the 'high places'.
For one who is acquainted with the mystery of grace the
mountain is better than the city. On the peaks the chamois does
not fall into the hands of the shearer! Flee the settled dwellings,
man of the mountains!
EPHRAIM OF SYRIA Sermon on Monks, 3 (Lamy 4,1 50)

In this way it will be possible by degrees to walk in the hubbub
of the city carrying the silence of the mountains in one's heart.
In the world there are many things obscuring the view and disturb­
ing taste and hearing. That is why it is necessary . . . to run away
from all excitement and take refuge in the desert where tranquillity
is total, serenity complete, noise does not exist, where eyes are fixed
on God alone and ears attentive to hearing only the divine words.
The ears delight to hear the symphony of the Spirit whose power
over the soul is so strong that, once anyone has been touched by
this music, he can no longer prefer either food or drink or sleep to
it. Henceforward neither the crowd nor the bustle of this world's
affairs can distract one whose attention is so engaged . . . So those
who have climbed to the mountain top no longer hear more of
what is going on in the cities than an insignificant and irritating
noise resembling the buzzing of bees.
jOHN CHRYSOSTOM Second Sermon to Stelechius on Compunction
(PG 47,4 1 1 )

4 · How to pray?

The fundamental part of meditation that can pierce the heart sud­
denly, no matter where, no matter when - in the way a lover
remembers the beloved and is filled with immense joy - consists in
recollecting that God exists and that he loves us. He, the unfathomed
deep beyond all, takes us to himself as a father his child. He admits us
to an area of non-death, of positive inspiration free of anguish and
hatred, the place of the Holy Spirit. In the Eucharist he gives us an
earnest of the Kingdom. Then his sweetness invades our heart, we
thirst for him, we long for all humankind to share this joy of ours,
and we pray that all may be saved.

200

Approaches to Contemplation
I will not deny thy love
for it is thou who didst form me from the earth,
it is thou who clast stretch out thy hand and support me.
That must be the point of my meditation in my time of prayer.

EVAGRIUS OF PONTUS Protrepticus, (Frankenberg, p. 5 5 6)

The holy Abba Evagrius commented thus on the prayer that is
in the Gospel according to Matthew: Our Father who art in
heaven . . .
Our Father who art in heaven: these are the words of those who
enjoy intimacy with God, like a son in the bosom of his father.
Hallowed be thy name: that is to say, may it, being glorified
through our witness, be hallowed among us, by people who will
say: these are true servants of God.
Thy Kingdom come: the Kingdom of God is the Holy Spirit.
We pray that he may be sent down upon us.
Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven: the will of God is
the salvation of every soul. What is accomplished among the powers
of heaven we pray may come about for us on earth.
Our bread for tomorrow is what we shall inherit from God.
We pray that we may have an earnest of it today, that is, that his
sweetness may make itself felt in us in this world, causing a burning
thirst.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Catenae on the Gospels, Coptic Documents
(Lagarde, p. 1 3 )

After the Lord's Prayer, the immemorial prayer o f the Church,
come the psalms following the sequence of Hebrew prayer. Psalmody
gives its rhythm to the life of a monk and each of the faithful ought to
practise it to some extent. All Tradition applies the psalms to Jesus. At
the same time, as Cassian explains, the psalms ought to be our own;
they ought to enter into and illuminate our most tragic experiences;
they ought to be our cry to God over all the contradictions of our
destiny, our violence, our despair, our fervour.
When we listen to the psalms . . . we must pay attention to seeing
Christ, to discerning him. Apply yourself to this psalm with us, let us
seek Christ in it. Yes, he will show himself to those who seek him, he
who appeared to people who were not seeking him. He who saved
those who scorned him will not shun those who desire him.
AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO Commentary on Psalm 98 (PL 3 7 , 1 2 5 8 )

On Prayer

201

Penetrated by the same feelings in which the psalm was composed,
it is as if we became the authors of it and we run ahead of
its thought rather than follow it. We grasp the meaning before
reading the words. The sacred words reawaken our experience
reminding us of the assaults we have undergone and still undergo
every day, of the marks of our negligence or, on the contrary,
of our fervour, blessings of divine visitation or wiles of the en­
emy, the havoc wrought by the forgetfulness that is so ready to
creep into our soul, our frailty . . . and our blindness. All these
feelings we find expressed in the psalms. They are the bright
mirror in which we become more deeply conscious of what is
happening to us. We are made sensitive by our own experience.
It is no longer a question of what we have merely heard. We are
in touch with the reality. We understand it completely. It is no
longer simply entrusted to our memory; we give birth to it in the
depth of our heart as an intuition that forms part of our being.
Reading throws light on experience. By this method our soul
arrives at the purity of prayer . . . The soul pours out its prayer
to God with unspeakable groaning.
CASSIAN Conferences, X,u (SC

54,

P. 92)