loving care with which fathers look after their little children. It has
been said, 'The Lord protects little children.' . . .
When God sees that in all purity of heart you are trusting in
him more than in yourself . . . then a strength unknown to you will
come to make its dwelling in you. And you will feel in all your
senses the power of him who is with you.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 19 (p. 67 )
It is by the 'depths of the humbled heart' and not by some
conceited 'ascent' that a person really rises, ascending from the
crucified Christ to the glorified Christ. One should read again here the
account of humility to be found in the Rule of St Benedict. The degrees
of humility lead us from the fear of God - which draws us up out of
the mire - eventually to the love that banishes the fear. Obedience,
patience, silence: these are attitudes appropriate to monks but also
to all those who are trying to practise an 'interior monasticism'.
If we wish to attain the summit of humility, we must by our actions
set up the ladder that appeared in a dream to Jacob and on which
he saw angels descending and ascending. This descent and ascent
show us that by trying to climb we descend and by humility we
ascend. Now, this ladder thus set up is our life in this world, and
when the heart is humbled the Lord raises it to heaven. The sides
of the ladder are our body and soul, and on these sides God's call
has fixed the steps of humility for us to climb . . .
The first degree of humility consists in always keeping present
in the mind the fear of God and absolutely avoiding forgetfulness
of it . . .
The second degree of humility is not to love one's own will,
not to take pleasure in fulfilling one's own desires, but in one's
actions to imitate the Lord when he says: 'I have come down from
heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me'
(John 6.3 8) . . .
The third degree of humility is to subject oneself in all obedience
to a superior for the love of God, imitating the Lord of whom the
apostle says: 'He became obedient unto death' (Philippians 2.8).
The fourth degree of humility consists in keeping patience and
tranquillity of spirit, even when hard and repugnant commands are
given or one is unjustly treated . . .
The fifth degree of humility consists in disclosing to the abbot
in humble confession the evil thoughts that come into the heart,
or the wrong done in secret . . .

Confidence and Humility

157

The sixth degree of humility is when the monk is happy in the
worst of conditions, and whatever requests are made of him he still
sees himself as a bad and unworthy worker . . .
The seventh degree of humility is to know oneself the meanest
and most despicable of men, not merely by saying so but by believing
it with heartfelt conviction . . .
The eighth degree of humility is when the monk does nothing
save what is commanded him by the common rule of the monastery
and the example of his seniors.
The ninth degree of humility is when the monk has con足
trol of his tongue and remaining silent only speaks when he is
questioned . . .
The tenth degree of humility is when we are no longer disposed
to laugh easily; for it is written: 'A fool raises his voice when
he laughs' (Ecclesiasticus 21 .20).
The eleventh degree of humility is when the monk utters
but few words when he speaks, words, however, of wisdom
spoken quietly without scoffing, humbly and with gravity; for
it is written: 'The wise man is recognized by the fewness of his
words.'
The twelfth degree of humility is when the monk not only in
his heart but also in his outward bearing suggests humility to those
who see him . . .
Once these steps have been climbed the monk will soon come
to that perfect love of God which drives out fear. Thanks to this
love he will begin to observe, as though naturally and from habit,
everything which at first he was afraid to look at; no longer for
fear of hell, but for love of Christ, and through good habits and
delight in virtue.
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, VII (Centenario, pp. 3 2-42)

It is especially profitable not to boast, not to put oneself for足
ward, carefully to refrain from speaking about one's own ascetic
practices, to give the glory to God, and not to oneself, for every good
thing that seems to happen in or because of oneself. In this way
any narcissistic tendencies will be converted into self-forgetfulness
and trustful self-abandonment.
Those who fear the Lord do not boast of their good observance.
They consider that everything good in them comes not from them足
selves but from the Lord. They glorify him who is acting in

158

Initiation for Warfare

them, saying with the prophet: 'Not to us, 0 Lord, not to us,
but to thy name give the glory.'
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, Prologue, 29-30 ( ibid. p. 6)

One day in the Vale of the Hermitages, when a feast was being
celebrated, the brethren were eating together in their place of as足
sembly. A certain brother said to those who were serving at table,
'I won't eat anything cooked, just a little salt on my bread.'
The one who was serving at table called to another brother
and said in the presence of the whole gathering, 'This brother is
not eating anything cooked. Bring him just a little salt.'
Then one of the elders rose and said to the brother who
had asked for salt, 'It would have been better for you today
to eat meat alone in your cell, rather than to publish what you are
doing to so many of the brethren.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anonymous series, 1 24 (SO
p . 3 66-?)

I,

Whatever miracle may be worked in us is worked by God. In
the healing of a soul or a body it is better to tell a lie in order to
remain unknown than to be accorded the fame of a wonder-worker.
Healing is by God alone, and the faith of the person who is healed.
' Your faith has healed you,' says Jesus.
A woman who had cancer of the breast heard of Abba Longinus
and sought to meet him. Now, he dwelt at the ninth milestone
beyond Alexandria. When the woman came looking for him he
was gathering firewood by the sea. Approaching him the woman
said, 'Abba, where does Abba Longinus the servant of God live?'
She had no idea it was he. His reply was, 'Why are you looking
for that impostor? Don't go to him. He is an impostor. What is the
matter with you?' The woman showed him her trouble. He made
the sign of the cross over the place and sent her away, saying, 'Go,
and God will heal you, for Longinus cannot be any use to you.'
The woman trusted these words and was healed on the spot. Later,
when she was recounting the episode to others and describing the
old man, she discovered that he was the Abba Longinus.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Longinus, 3 (PG 65,256-7)

A great monk, when he is dying, confesses that he has not even
begun to serve God. The stories from the Egyptian desert tell us
that the brothers gathered round Abba Sisoes when he was dying.

Confidence and Humility

159