In the Spirit the Church is the mystery of the Risen One, his
sacramental presence. It might be called the Pneumatosphere, in
which the preaching of the Apostles, the Good News, is always alive
and present, continuing the 'witness of the prophets, the apostles
and all the disciples'. Faithful and creative Tradition therefore is
the life of the Holy Spirit in the Body of Christ; not passing things
down, but 'newness of the Spirit', the newness that is constantly
being renewed in persons. The Spirit abounds most plentifully in
the sacramental body of Christ, but wherever the Spirit is at work
in history and in the universe, the Church is secretly present. There
is not a blade of grass that does not grow within the Church, not
a constellation that does not gravitate towards her, every quest for
truth, for j ustice, for beauty is made within her (even if the prophets
and great creative spirits have sometimes been persecuted by the
ecclesiastical institution), every scrap of meditation, of wisdom, of
celebration is gathered in by her (even though Christianity has at
certain times formed itself into a religious association that ignored
or fought against other people).
The Church's preaching is the same everywhere and remains true
to itself, supported by the witness of the prophets, the apostles
and all the disciples, from the beginning, through the middle, to the
end, in a word, throughout the history of God's constant activity
of saving humanity and making himself present to us in faith. This
faith never ceases. We receive it from the Church and guard it under
the action of the Spirit like a precious liquid that rejuvenates itself
and the vessel containing it. The Church has been entrusted with
this gift of God, just as God gave his breath to the flesh that he
fashioned in order that all the members might receive its life. And
this gift conveys the fullness of union with Christ, that is, the Holy
Spirit, pledge of incorruptibility, confirmation of our faith, ladder of
our ascent to God . . . For where the Church is, there the Spirit of

97

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

God is also; and where the Spirit of God is, there the Church is,
and all grace. And the Spirit is truth.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III,24 , 1 5 (SC 2 I I ,

p.

4 70- 1 )

The Bride of Christ, the Church, in its human, al l too human
aspect, can be unfaithful to him. But he never ceases to give himself
to her who is his body. He makes her mother of living truth for us,
a place of rebirth.

2 . Scripture> the First Sacrament

Already in Scripture there is an aspect of incarnation. Scripture
embodies the Word, and the incarnation of the Word completes
the transformation into Eucharist of the hearing or reading of the
Word.
For true Christian thought is Eucharistic. The Eucharist of the
mind - God must be loved with all one's mind - prepares us for the
nuptial encounter of the sacrament. And the sacrament in its turn
enlightens the mind.
We are said to drink the blood of Christ not only when we
receive it according to the rite of the mysteries, but also when
we receive his words, in which life dwells, as he said himself: 'The
words that I have spoken to you are spirit and life' (John 6.63 ).
0RIGEN Homilies o n Numbers, 1 6,9 (PG 1 2,701 )

I n truth, before Jesus, Scripture was like water, but since Jesus it
has become for us the wine into which Jesus changed the water.
0RIGEN Commentary on St John's Gospel, 1 3 ,60 ( GCS 4,294- 5 )

In this way Scripture forms the body o f the Word. The ultimate
meaning of the Old Testament is revealed in Christ by symbol and
'typology' that discern in the persons and events of the Bible 'types', in
the sense of figures of the incarnate Word and his work of salvation.
The context of Christian symbolism is the incarnation, the union of
the divine and the human in the person of the Word. Now the whole
of the Bible is one moment of the incarnation.

98

Initiation for Warfare

This is how you are to understand the Scriptures - as the one perfect
body of the Word.
0RIGEN Fragment of a Homily on Jeremiah (PG 1 7,289)

In the two angels [who appeared in Christ's tomb] we can recognize
the two Testaments . . . They have come together where the Lord's
body is, because, by announcing in convergent fashion that the
Lord took flesh, died, and rose again, the two Testaments are as
it were seated, the Old at his head and the New at his feet. That is
why the two cherubim who protect the mercy seat face each other
. . . Cherub indeed means fullness of knowledge. And what do the
two cherubim signify but the two Testaments? And what does the
mercy seat represent but the incarnate Lord, of whom John says
that he was made the propitiation for our sins? When the Old
Testament foretells what the New Testament declares accomplished
in the Lord, they face each other like the two cherubim, their
gaze fixed on the mercy seat, because they are looking at the
Lord between them and they . . . are recounting in harmony the
mystery of his loving purpose.
GREGORY THE GREAT Homilies on the Gospels, 2,53,3 (PL 76,1 1 9 1 )

There are circles o f initiation into the Word, and the narrower
they become, the more intensely is its presence felt. The Bible is an
'evangelical preparation' and is concentrated in the Gospels. They
in their turn find their completion in the Gospel of full initiation,
that of St John. To enter into the Johannine message is to identify
oneself with the Beloved Disciple. In it is made known the invocation
of the Name, to the rhythm of the very beating of Christ's heart,
John's head resting on his breast.
Jesus crucified, Mary and John on either side of the cross: that is
actually the first Church (not yet Peter's but already John's) and Jesus
commits to it his Spirit (Luke 23.46) and the sacraments (John 1 9. 3 4 ) .
No one has dared to give so pure a revelation of the divinity [of
the Lord] as John. We must make bold to say the Gospels are the
fulfilment of the whole Bible and John's Gospel is the fulfilment of
the Gospels. No one can grasp their meaning unless he has rested
on Christ's breast, unless he has received Mary from Jesus so that
she has become his mother too.
0RIGEN Commentary on the Gospel of john, 1,6 (GCS 4,8-9)

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

99

The divine meaning of the Scriptures has to be gleaned from the
letter of it and beyond the letter, through contemplation guided by
the Spirit. In the Fathers we do not find any fundamentalism, but
Scripture opened by the Spirit to its very heart, namely the mystery
of the Trinity, the source of love, and Christ's victory over death
and hell, the triumph of love.
If you try to reduce the divine meaning to the purely external signifi­
cation of the words, the Word will have no reason to come down
to you. It will return to its secret dwelling, which is contemplation
that is worthy of it. For it has wings, this divine meaning, given to
it by the Holy Spirit who is its guide . . . But to be unwilling ever
to rise above the letter, never to give up feeding on the literal sense,
is the mark of a life of falsehood.
0RIGEN Commentary on Proverbs, 23 (PG 17,221-4)