in the 'memory' of God are made present, actual and active by the
'memory' of the Church. In this living 'memorial' the priest is the
image of Christ, an 'other Christ', as St John Chrysostom says. He
bears witness to Christ's unshakeable fidelity to his Church. Through
the one who sums up the people's prayer and constitutes for them the
sign of Christ, Christ our one high priest accomplishes the Eucharist.
And everything is done in the Holy Spirit. It is in the Holy Spirit that
the Church is the 'mystery' of the Risen Christ, the world in process
of transfiguration. The Spirit 'broods' on the waters at the beginning
and 'hovers' over them like a great bird. In order to make the human
being live, God breathes his Spirit into the clay. The Spirit comes
down on the Blessed Virgin in order that the Word may take flesh
in her. He rests on Jesus as his Messianic anointing and it is in him
that Jesus thrills with joy and multiplies the 'signs' of the Kingdom. It
is by the life-giving power of the Spirit that God raises Jesus (Romans
r .4 ) . Likewise when the people are assembled to offer themselves in
the offertory of the bread and wine, the Spirit comes upon them to
'manifest' the body and blood of Christ through the bread and wine
(the word 'manifest' is found in the eucharistic liturgy of St Basil).
The Spirit thereby integrates the people in the glorified humanity of
the Lord. So the memorial is effected by the coming of the Spirit in
response to the Church's epiclesis (a word that means 'invocation').
All the faithful ratify this invocation by their amens. In this respect
they are concelebrants of the liturgy. But only the apostolic witness
of the bishop (or of the priest representing him) can testify to the
epiclesis being heard, to the fullness of God's faithfulness.
Christ, through the priest, fulfils the Eucharist by the memorial.
That is the dimension that the Latin Church was to emphasize.
Everything is fulfilled in the Holy Spirit for whom the priest asks
the Father in close communion with the people. That is the dimension
that the Christian East was to emphasize.
Two inseparable dimensions are today on the way to reunion
after a long history of separation.
The priest says, 'This is my body', and these words change the
nature of the offerings. Thus the word of the Saviour, pronounced
once, has sufficed and will suffice to fulfil the most perfect sacrifice
on the altar of every church, from the Last Supper of Jesus Christ
right up till our time and till his coming again.
The bread becomes the bread of heaven, because the Spirit
comes to rest upon it. What is there in front of us is not the
work of any human power. He who did this at the Last Supper

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

113

still does it now. For our part, we hold the rank of servants: it is
he who sanctifies and transforms.
There is only one Christ, whole and entire now as then, a single
body . . . We do not offer another victim as the high priest of those
days did [in the Old Testament] . It is always the same victim, or
rather we make a memorial of the sacrifice.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM Homily on the Treachery ofJudas, r,6 (PG 49,
3 80), Homily on John, 4 5,2 (PG 59,2 5 3 ), Homily on Matthew, 8 2,5
(PG 5 8,74 3 ), Homily on Hebrews, 17,3 (PG 6J,I J I )

We pray God to send the Holy Spirit on the gifts laid here, to make
the bread the body of Christ and the wine the blood of Christ. For
the Holy Spirit sanctifies and transforms all that he touches.
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogical Catecheses, V,7 (SC 1 26, p. 1 5 4)
The bread and wine of the Eucharist before the holy invoca­
tion are ordinary bread and wine, but after the invocation the
bread becomes the body of Christ and the wine the blood of
Christ.
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogical Catecheses, I,7 (SC 1 26 p. 94)
To communicate in the risen Christ is to enter the realm of
an unending Pentecost. In fact the body of Christ is a 'spiritual'
body, pneumatikon, according to St Paul. It is not dematerialized,
but brought fully to life by the energies of the Spirit. The Body of
God where the Spirit blazes [Le Corps de Dieu ou flambe /'Esprit],

to quote the title of a fine book by Daniel Ange.
We are fed with the bread from heaven, our thirst is quenched by
the cup of joy, the chalice afire with the Spirit, the blood wholly
warmed from on high by the Spirit.
An anonymous Homily inspired by H I P P O LYTUS Treatise on Easter,
Exordium 8 (SC 27, pp. 1 3 3 & 1 3 5 )

Fire and the Spirit are in our baptism. In the bread and the
cup also are fire and the Spirit.
EPHRAIM OF SYRIA On Faith (Lamy I,

p.

413)

1 14

Initiation for Warfare

From now on you will be eating a pure and spotless Passover meal,
leavened bread, bread of perfection kneaded and cooked by the
Spirit - the body and blood of God himself that is offered for all
humanity.
EPHRAIM OF SYRIA Second Sermon on Holy Week, (Lamy, I, p. 390)

To communicate in Christ is therefore to communicate in the
Spirit.
Every time you drink, you receive the forgiveness of your sins and
you are intoxicated with the Spirit. That is why the Apostle said,
'Be not drunk with wine, but be filled with the Spirit'. For one who
is drunk with wine totters and reels. But one who is intoxicated
with the Spirit is rooted in Christ.
AMBROSE OF MILAN The Sacraments V, I J , I 7 (SC 2 5 , p. 92)

The Eucharist anticipates the Parousia, Christ's return, or rather
that of the world to Christ. So it is all pointing towards the final
fulfilment. That is why the Aramaic word Maranatha - 'Come,
Lord!' - was a specifically eucharistic prayer in the early Church.
What Scriabin at the beginning of our century was content to dream
of, the expression of a mystery in a musical composition so beautiful
that at its last chord the world would actually be transfigured, the
Church of the earliest centuries was praying and hoping for at every
celebration of the Eucharist. 'May the Lord come and the world
pass away,' the Didache teaches us to pray: the world, that is, of
illusion and death. The creation, by contrast, being wholly good,
will arrive at fulfilment when God is 'all in all'. So the Eucharist
constitutes the Church as a people of the Exodus on its way to the
Kingdom, already fed by it with eschatological 'manna', a 'manna'
of eternity.
our most holy Passover, Christ, Wisdom, Word and Power of
God, enable us to participate in thee still more clearly in the
unquenchable light of thy Kingdom to come.

0

Prayer after Communion, in the Liturgy of St Basil

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

115

5· The Eucharist, Foundation of the Church

The very being of the Church is eucharistic.
Thy hand holds up the world
and the universe rests in thy love.
Thy life-giving body is at the heart of thy Church;
thy sacred blood protects the Bride.
CYRILLONAS Supplication to God (Bickell I, p. 26)