Gregory explains the Trinity by means of a double contrast. He
contrasts it on the one hand with the ancient pagan notion of diffused
divinity, and on the other with the God of Judaism who is totally
transcendent and distinct (although this statement would certainly
need qualification in the light of the mystical tradition of Judaism).
Today, from the same standpoint, we could contrast the mystery of
the Trinity with, on the one hand, the exoteric rigid monotheism
of popular Judaism and Islam, and, on the other, with Hinduism
and Buddhism and their transpersonal concept of divinity wherein
everything is engulfed, as in an immeasurable womb - which is why
India loves to speak of the 'divine Mother'.
Here too some qualification would be necessary in speaking
about both the 'way of love' in India and the various Buddhist
interpretations of grace. However, the mystery of personality and
inner life, a synthesis of which is sought with difficulty by the
various religions, seems to have been resolved in the doctrine of the
Three-in-One, where association is perceived within the a bsolute, or
rather the absolute within the association.
We are made in the image of God. From all eternity there is
present in God a unique mode of existence, which is at the same
time Unity and the Person in communion; and we are called to realize
this unity in Christ, when we meet him, under the divided flames
of the Spirit. Therefore we express the metaphysics of the person
in the language of Trinitarian theology. What could be called the

66

Understanding the Mysteries

'Trinitarian person' is not the isolated individual of Western society
(whose implicit philosophy regards human beings as 'similar' but not
'consubstantial'). Nor is it the absorbed and amalgamated human be­
ing of totalitarian society, or of systematized oriental mysticism, or of
the sects. It is, and must be, a person in a relationship, in communion.
The transition from divine communion to human communion is
accomplished in Christ who is consubstantial with the Father and the
Spirit in his divinity and consubstantial with us in his humanity.
When I say God, it is of the Father, of the Son and of the Holy
Spirit that I wish to speak without diluting the godhead beyond
these limits, lest I should introduce a whole tribe of divinities, and
without restricting it to something less than the three Persons, lest
I be accused of impoverishing the godhead. Otherwise I should fall
into the simplicity of the Judaizers or into the multiplicity of the
Hellenizers . . .
Thus the Holy of Holies, enveloped and veiled by the Seraphim,
is glorified by a threefold consecration in the unity of the godhead.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration

54,

For Easter, 4 (PG 3 6,628)

Gregory Nazianzen has been surnamed 'The Theologian' be­
cause he has spoken - or rather sung - of the very secret of God,
'theology' in the strict sense of the word, by celebrating the Trinity.
The mystery of the Three-in-One exceeds the bounds of fallen
rationality, which knows only how to contrast or make the same.
It does this with the aim of transfiguring it, transforming it into an
understanding of the Person and of Love.
I have hardly begun to think of the Unity before the Trinity bathes
me in its splendour: I have hardly begun to think of the Trinity
before the Unity seizes hold of me again.
When one of the Three presents himself to me, I think it is
the whole, so full to overflowing is my vision, so far beyond
me does he reach. There is no room left in my mind, it is too
limited to understand even one. When I combine the Three in one
single thought, I see only one great flame without being able to
subdivide or analyse the single light.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration

49,

On Baptism, 4 1 (PG 3 6,4 1 7 )

When I speak of God, you should feel yourselves bathed in a
single light and in three lights . . . There is undivided division,

God: Unity and Difference

67

differentiated unity. One only in the Three: such is the godhead. The
Three as One only: they are the Three in whom is the godhead, or,
to speak more precisely, the Three who are the godhead.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration

39,

I I (PG 3 6, 3 4 5 )

In their expositions of the Trinity, St Basil and St Maximus the
Confessor emphasize that the Three is not a n umber ( St Basil spoke
in this respect of 'meta-mathematics'). The divine Persons are not
added to one another, they exist in one another: the Father is in the
Son and the Son is in the Father, the Spirit is united to the Father
together with the Son and 'completes the blessed Trinity' as if he
were ensuring the circulation of love within it. This circulation of
love was called by the Fathers perichoresis, another key word of
their spirituality, along with the word we have already met, kenosis.
Perichoresis, the exchange of being by which each Person exists only
in virtue of his relationship with the others, might be defined as a
'joyful kenosis'. The kenosis of the Son in history is the extension of
the kenosis of the Trinity and allows us to share i n it.
Even if the godhead, which is beyond all, is worshipped by us
as Trinity and as Unity, we know neither the three nor the one as
numbers.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR On the Divine Names, I 3 (PG 4,4 I 2)

When we are speaking of unity we do not count by the method
of addition to reach plurality, because we do not say 'one, two,
three'; nor 'first, second, third'. 'I am the first and I am the last'
(Isaiah 44.6). Of a second God we have not heard anything, seeing
that when we worship a 'God from God' we confess the difference
between the Persons who always remain in the Principle of Unity
. . . because in God the Father and iri God the Only-Begotten we
are contemplating only a single reality in the unchanging godhead
reflected as it were in a mirror. The Son, indeed, is in the Father,
and the Father in the Son, since the latter is like the former and the
former is like the latter, so to that extent they are one. According
to the distinction of Persons they are 'one' and 'one', but according
to their unity of essence, the two are only one . . . The Holy Spirit
also is one and is unity; he also is spoken of separately; through
the Son, who is one and is unity, he is united to the Father, who is
one and is unity; and by himself he completes the Blessed Trinity

68

Understanding the Mysteries

. . . The proof that he possesses the same nature as they derives not
only from that, but also from the fact that he is said to be 'from
God'. Not at all in the way in which all things are 'from God', but
in such a way that he proceeds 'from God'; not by generation like
the Son, but as Breath from the mouth of God.
'Mouth' here does not denote part of the body, nor does
'breath' denote a puff of air that is quickly spent. 'Mouth' here
has to be understood in a manner worthy of God, and 'breath'
describes a living essence, the effective cause of sanctification.
BASIL OF C}ESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 1 8 (PG 3 2, 1 49-52)