B y the Eucharist the community i s integrated into the body
of Christ. And the body is inseparable from the head. 'The least
separation would bring about our death,' says John Chrysostom in
another passage.
Just as the head and the body constitute a single human being, so
Christ and the Church constitute a single whole.
This union is effected through the food that he has given us in
his desire to show the love he has for us. For this reason he united
himself intimately with us, he blended his body with ours like leaven,
so that we should become one single entity, as the body is joined to
the head.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM Homily on I Corinthians, 3 o, r (PG 6 1 ,279), Homily
on John, 4 6,3 (PG 59,260)

Let us learn the wonder of this sacrament, the purpose of its
institution, the effects it produces. We become a single body,
according to Scripture, members of his flesh and bone of his
bones. This is what is brought about by the food that he gives
us. He blends himself with us so that we may all become one single
entity in the way the body is joined to the head.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM Homily on John, 46 (PG 59,260)

'Of the same blood' with Christ, 'incorporated i nto him',
'grafted' on to his body, a 'single plant', a 'single entity' with
him, the faithful are also 'members one of another'. These powerful
Pauline expressions, with their unmistakable eucharistic associations,
have been tirelessly commented on and developed by the Fathers. The
Eucharist renews, strengthens and deepens the 'consubstantiality',
the ontological unity of all human beings. They all form one and the
same being in Christ, one and the same life through time and

Initiation for Warfare

1 16

space. In this way the Eucharist is the basis of the 'catholicity' of
the Church, its existence kath-holon, in accordance with the whole,
in accordance with the fullness of a truth that is life and love, the
communion of saints rooted in communion by the 'holy things',
namely, the body and blood of Christ.
As this broken bread once scattered over the mountains has been
gathered together to make a single entity, so gather thy Church
together from the ends of the earth into thy Kingdom.
Didache, IX,4 (SC 248, p. 1 7 6)

When the Lqrd calls his body bread, made from the collection of a
large number of grains, he is pointing to the unity of our people. And
when he calls his blood wine, which is pressed from a large number
of clusters of grapes to form a single liquid, he signifies that our
flock is made up of a multitude gathered into unity.
CYPRIAN OF CARTHAGE Letter 69, V,2 (Correspondance, Belles
Lettres 1 9 6 1 II, p. 242)

Although we are distinguishable by our very different personalities,
as were for instance Peter, or john, or Thomas, or Matthew, yet
we are merged as it were in a single body in Christ by feeding on
his unifying body.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Commentary on John,

II,II

(PG 7 4,5 60)

Of the one and of the other, Christ makes a single body. Thus he
who lives in Rome looks on the Indians as his own members. Is there
any union to be compared with that? Christ is the head of all.
jOHN CHRYSOSTOM Homily 6r,

r

(PG 59,3 62)

Men, women, children, deeply divided as to race, nationality,
language, class, work, knowledge, rank and fortune . . . are all
created afresh by the Church in the Spirit. On all alike she impresses
a divine form. All receive from her a unique unbreakable nature, a
nature that does not allow any account to be taken henceforward of
the manifold and deep differences which distinguish them. Thereby
all are united in a truly catholic way. In the Church no one is in
any way separated from the community. Everyone is, so to speak,
merged into everyone else, by the simple and indivisible power
of faith . . . Christ is thus everything in everyone, Christ who
incorporates everything in himself in accordance with the infinite
and all-wise power of his goodness. He is the centre upon which all

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

117

lines converge so that the creatures of the one God may not remain
strangers or enemies to one another for lack of common ground on
which to display their friendliness and their peace.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Mystagogia, I (PG 9 1 , 6 6 s - 8 )

The early Church saw this unity as analogous to the unity of
bread or wine that is made up of many grains of wheat or many
grapes, each of which must be crushed, like the ascetical overcoming
of the egocentric self in baptism. Cyprian of Carthage prefers the
analogy of the water that the priest pours into the wine when he
prepares the 'holy gifts' before the the eucharistic celebration. But
it is always a question of the integration of the Christian people in
Christ.
Because Christ embodies us all, we see that the water represents the
people, and wine the blood of Christ. When therefore the water is
mixed with the wine in the chalice, it is the people being mixed with
Christ. The multitude of the faithful are being united with him in
whom they believe. This mixture, this union of the wine and the
water in the cup of the Lord, is indissoluble. Likewise the Church,
that is to say the people in the Church who persevere faithfully and
constantly in their faith, can never be separated from Christ, but
will remain attached to him by a love which will make of the two
one being. But when the cup of the Lord is consecrated, water alone
can never be offered, any more than wine alone can be offered. For
if wine alone is offered, the blood of Christ is present without us.
But if water alone, the people are there without Christ. On the
other hand, when the two are mixed and by blending together
form a single entity, then the mystery is completed. The cup of the
Lord then is not water alone or wine alone without any mingling
of the two, any more than the body of the Lord could be flour alone
or water alone without the mingling of the two and their union to
form bread. In a similar way also the unity of the Christian people
is represented: just as many grains brought together, ground and
mixed with one another, make a single loaf of bread, so in Christ,
who is the bread of heaven, we are well aware there is only one
body in which our multiplicity is united and blended together.
CYPRIAN OF CARTHAGE Letter 63 ,

13

(Belles Lettres II, pp. 20 7 - 8 )

The earthly liturgy is united with the heavenly liturgy that
the angelic powers celebrate. During the eucharistic liturgy the

Initiation for Warfare

118

congregation is 'lifted up to heaven', or rather finds itself in a
dimension of resurrection where there is no longer any separation
between heaven and earth, or between angels and human beings,
or between the living and the dead (who are not dead but preparing
themselves also for the resurrection, or, in the case of the saints,
preparing us for it).
On high the armies of the angels are giving praise. Here below,
in the Church, the human choir takes up after them the same
doxology. Above us, angels of fire make the thrice-holy hymn
resound magnificently. Here below is raised the echo of their
hymn. The festival of heaven's citizens is united with that of the
inhabitants of earth in a single thanksgiving, a single upsurge of
happiness, a single chorus of joy.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM On Ozias, Homily 4,

I

(PG 5 6,1 20)