independently of your will, this silence remains in you, be sure you
have entered the peace you seek . . .
And again: if in every thought that arises in your soul, and in
every remembrance and point of contemplation that come to you in
this peace, you find tears filling your eyes and flowing with no effort
down your cheeks, be sure that the wall before you is down . . .
And if you find from time to time your intellect has become
immersed in your heart without your having foreseen it and apart
from any regulation, and if it remains there for a moment . . . if,
after that, you feel your limbs seized, as it were, by a great weakness
and peace reigns over your thoughts, if this state continues, be sure
that the cloud has begun to cover your dwelling with its shadow.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 1 2 (Spanos, p. 47)
Intense meditation on the Lord's Prayer, namely, on our adoption
in Christ, can enable us for an instant to escape from time to share in
the eternal relationship of love between the Father and the Son.
Beyond all language and beyond the motion of prayer itself, the
soul experiences what Cassian calls the 'prayer of fire', fulfilment
in the abyss of light and love of the Trinitarian life.
The various kinds of prayer [petition, promise, intercession, pure
praise] are followed by a higher state still . . . it is the contemplation
of God alone, an immeasurable fire of love. The soul settles in
it and sinks into its depths. It converses with God as with
its own Father, very familiarly, with special tenderness. That
we have a duty to aim for this state, we are taught by the
very text of the Lord's Prayer, since it says, 'Our Father'. We
thereby profess that the God and Lord of the universe is our
Father, and therefore express the certainty that we have been
called from the condition of slaves to that of adopted children.
jOHN CASSIAN Conferences, IX, 18 (SC 54, p. 5 5 )

The prayer 'Our Father' raises those who make themselves
familiar with it to that prayer of fire which very few know from
experience. It is an ineffable state that is far above all human
feeling, without the sound of any voice, without any movement
of the tongue, without any articulate word. The soul is wholly
filled with light and no longer makes use of human language,
which is always limited. But it engrosses the whole person and
becomes an abundant spring from which prayer flows and soars

208

Approaches to Contemplation

in an ineffable fashion up to God. It says so many things in this
brief space of time that it cannot easily express them or even
remember them when it returns to itself.
jOHN CASSIAN Conferences, IX,25 (SC 54, p. 6 1 -2)

St Isaac of Nineveh for his part distinguishes simple prayer, with
its many different forms, from the prayer of contemplation, in which
a person remains 'like a body without breath', in a sort of ecstasy
which none the less is still perceived as prayer. In the end when
all activity of the tongue, the intellect and the heart ceases there
comes the ineffable state, complete silence, for the Trinity himself
takes up his abode in the soul.
It is at the moment when a person is praying and beseeching
God, talking to him and struggling to gather his thoughts together
from all directions . . . that he is open to God alone and his heart
is filled with God. He comprehends then the incomprehensible.
For the Holy Spirit . . . breathes on him unti,l, in the height of
concentration, the very motion of his prayer stops. His spirit in
its wonderment is struck with amazement and filled with love, and
forgets its own desires and petitions. Its movements are plunged into
deep inebriation. It is no longer of this world. It no longer makes
any distinction between soul and body and objects of memory.
The great and godly Gregory has said so: 'Prayer is the purity
of the spirit. It stops of its own accord when the light of the
Holy Trinity ravishes it in wonder.'
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 32 (p. 1 3 4-40)

The joy of prayer is one thing; the prayer of contemplation is
another. The latter is more precious than the former, as an adult
is more advanced than a child. The verses of a psalm may be very
delightful on the tongue, and the singing of a single verse during
prayer may prevent us from continuing and passing on to another
verse, so inexhaustible is it. But it may also happen that prayer
gives rise to contemplation, which interrupts what the lips are
saying. Then the person is in ecstasy. Contemplation makes him
as it were a body without breath. This is what we call the prayer of
contemplation . . . but there is still a measure in this contemplation
. . . it is always a prayer. The meditation has not yet reached the
point where there is no longer any prayer. It has not yet arrived at
the higher state. In fact, the movements of the tongue and of the heart

On Prayer

209

are keys. And what comes next is entry into the treasure house. Here
every tongue and every mouth falls silent and the heart too, that
gathers together the thoughts, and the spirit that governs the senses,
and the work of meditation. They are like a flutter of impudent birds.
Let their activity cease . . . for the Master of the house has come.
IsAAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 1 (p. 1 3 4)

This fullness, however, does not do away with the intellect,
rather it fertilizes it. The spirituality of the Fathers is not anti­
intellectual. For them the human being is logikos. He is the im­
age of the Logos, able to make out the meaning and consequently
capable of sound reasoning. The more the intellect is imbued with
the light and the love of God, the more it is purified, refined,
broadened, and cognisant of conscientious and beautiful thoughts,
which Hesychius of Batos compares to dolphins. Just as the dol­
phin in its leaping interweaves the sky and sea, so the thoughts
of the sanctified intellect combine the human and the divine. (The
dolphin, of course, for the first Christians symbolized Christ, in
whom the two natures are united.)
Prayer without distraction is the highest intellection of the intellect.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 3 5 (Philokalia I, I So)

The heart that is freed from imaginings ends up by producing
in itself holy and mysterious thoughts, as on a calm sea you see fish
leaping and dolphins gambolling.
HESYCHIUS OF BATOS On Sobriety and Virtue, 1 5 6 (Philokalia I,
165)

5· To Become Prayer

Ultimately prayer becomes spontaneous, continuous; it encounters
and liberates the deepest impulses of our nature and the hidden
glorification of objects. It puts an end to glory's exile. The very
p ulsing of the blood, the intuitions of the heart, the thoughts of the
mind never cease to 'sing in secret to the hidden God'.
When the Spirit dwells in a person, from the moment in which
that person has become prayer, he never leaves him. For the Spirit
himself never ceases to pray in him. Whether the person is asleep or

210

Approaches to Contemplation