to be inaugurating the age of the Spirit and professed the utmost
rigorism, in a sort of eschatological frenzy. Carried away by the
arguments of the sects, Tertullian ended by founding a Church of
his own, on the fringe of Montanism.
Tertullian was a man of passionate feeling, full of paradox.
He strove relentlessly against error but demanded from the State which he regarded anyway as evil - freedom of religion. He violently
rejected any philosophical approach to Christianity - 'What can
Athens have to do with Jerusalem?' - and professed a faith that
is irrational by choice. 'The Son of God has died: that imposes
itself absolutely on faith because it is absurd.' But at the same
time he appealed to the intuition of the soul as the image of God
- anima natura/iter Christiana.
In his Adversus Praxeam in particular he worked out Trinitarian
and Christological formulae that anticipated in a surprising way the
conciliar definitions of the fourth and fifth centuries. He was the
first to use, in regard to God, the words trinitas, persona, substantia:
'a single substance in the three together'. He points to two natures
in Christ 'in a single person, Jesus, God and man . . . so that the
property of each nature is preserved.' Like all the early Latin Fathers
Tertullian contemplated the divine unity flowing from the Father
into the Son and from the Father and the Son into the Spirit: a
global processio (meaning in this context the movement of the divine
consubstantiality of the Father in the Son, and from the Father and
the Son in the Holy Spirit) clearly quite different from the Greek
ekporeusis (which in the Greek theology of the fourth century means
the unique relationship by which the Father as the Principle of divinity
produces from all eternity the existence of the Spirit). In this processio
one can see the origins of the Filioque - though Tertullian himself
prefers to say 'through the Son'.
Tertullian defended the sanctity of marriage and the equality of
man and woman, but shows himself increasingly hostile to second
marriages for those widowed.
He set out and explained the meaning of fasting which was
very strict among the Montanists. This practice, then condemned
by the Church, was taken up again by the monastic movement with
its interiorization of eschatology. The monastic movement spread it
to the whole Church throughout the following century.
To his Wife PG 1 , I 27J-303; Fasting CCL 2 ( 1 9 54) p. 1 2 5 5-77,
English Translation by W.P. Le Saint in ACW 1 3

Biographical Notes

371

THEODORE O F MorsuESTIA (c. 3 5 0 - c. 428)

One of the greatest exegetes of the Patristic age, the principal repre­
sentative of the School of Antioch, Theodore was a fellow disciple and
friend of St John Chrysostom. They were both pupils of the creator
of Antiochene exegesis, Diodore of Tarsus. Theodore was persuaded
by John, in spite of his hesitations, to embrace a monastic life. He
was ordained priest at Antioch in 3 8 3 and nine years later became
bishop of Mopsuestia in Cilicia. He produced a considerable amount
of theological and exegetical writing. But he had been the teacher of
Nestorius, and when the followers of Cyril became once more in the
ascendant in the East, at the beginning of the sixth century, he was
denounced as a Nestorian and condemned at the Fifth Ecumenial
Council in 5 5 3. Like most of the Antiochenes he had laid stress on
Christ's actual individual humanity. He was accused of not having
clearly confessed the unity of God made man. It may be asked
whether he was not the victim of controversies, the significance of
which was appreciated only after his death; and whether he was
not j udged on the basis of an assortment of extracts torn from
their context or even interpolated. A large part of his work has
disappeared following that negative judgment. What remains of his
exegetical writing, in particular on St John (in a Syriac translation)
and on St Paul (in a Latin translation) bears witness to a remarkable
critical acumen and already perhaps to a certain scholarly objectivity
- something not found at all in Origen who never departs from a
theological and spiritual meditation on the Bible. In r 9 3 2 a Syriac
version of Theodore's Catechetical Homilies was discovered. They
possess the spiritual quality and historical importance of those of
Cyril of Jerusalem or John Chrysostom. One can only deprecate
the lack of precision in his Christological vocabulary: but that was
common enough in the workings of Christian thought before the
clear definition given by the Council of Chalcedon.
Catechetical Homilies Syriac text and French translation, Tonneau­
Devresse in Studi e Testi 1 45, Vatican City 1 949

THEOPHILUS OF ANTIOCH ( 2nd century)

One of the defenders of Christianity at the time when the Church, in
a minority, was periodically persecuted by the civil power, regarded

372

Biographical Notes

with mistrust by public optmon and harshly criticized by pagan
philosophers and Gnostic teachers.
Theophilus was born on the banks of the Euphrates, of pagan
parents. He received a sound Hellenistic education. After a long quest
he discovered the Bible (like the other apologists, at the moment when
J udaism was concentrating on its Torah he laid the emphasis on the
prophets) . He became a Christian in adult life and later became according to Eusebius's Ecclesiastical History the sixth bishop of
Antioch.
All that is left of his writings is an apology composed shortly
before r 8o and set out as a dialogue with a pagan friend. Its correct
attitude towards the State is remarkable. 'I do not worship the
Emperor: I pray for him.' And also the outline of a theology. For
the first time in a Christian text in Greek God, is called trias, the triad
he makes with his Logos (his Word) and his Sophia (his Wisdom).
The Word who was 'brought forth' at the moment of creation is
present in God from all eternity. In particular when Theophilus is
asked by his interlocutor why God is not visible, Theophilus refers
him to man, unable to see until he has 'opened the eyes of his soul'
and purified himself so as to become the 'mirror' of God. This is the
theme of man as 'image of God', the importance of which was to be
immense in Patristic spirituality.
-

Three Books to Autolycus SC 20 English translation in ANCL vol.3 ,
p . 4 9 by Marcus Dads. More details o f English translations can be
found in Johannes Quasten Patrology 4 vols. (from 1 9 5 0); Louis
Bouyer The Spirituality of the New Testament and of the Fathers
r 9 6o; The Study of Spirituality ed. Cheslyn Jones, Geoffrey Wain­
wright and Edward Yarnold S.J., SPCK, London 1 9 8 6; Christian
Spirituality, Bernard McGinn, John Meyendorff and John Leclercq,
London, 1 9 8 6 vol r .

THEOLOGICAL NOTES

A rianism