The following hymn to charity by St Isaac of Nineveh calls
to mind what the apostle Paul wrote in his First Epistle to the
Corinthians: 'Love is patient and kind; love is not jealous or boastful;
it is not arrogant or rude. Love does not insist on its own way; it is
not irritable or resentful; it does not rejoice at wrong, but rejoices in
the right. Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things,
endures all things' ( 1 Corinthians 1 3 ·4-7).
What is wrong is destructive suffering inflicted on others. Wrong
must not be returned for wrong. The only thing that counts is shared

278

Approaches to Contemplation

sympathy, based, as in Evagrius, on private solitude with God. As for
the sins of others, hide them, and if possible take them on yourself.
Let yourself be persecuted but do not persecute others.
Let yourself be crucified but do not crucify others.
Let yourself be insulted but do not insult others.
Let yourself be slandered but do not slander others . . .
Rejoice with those who rejoice and weep with those who weep.
Such is the sign of purity.
Suffer with the sick. Be afflicted with sinners.
Exult with those who repent. Be the friend of all.
But in your spirit remain alone . . .
Spread your cloak over anyone who falls into sin and shield him.
And if you cannot take his fault on yourself and accept punishment
in his place, do not destroy his character.
IsAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, sB (p. 2 3 8 )
True friendship remains faithful even when the friend is severely
tried or seems to be in the wrong, even and especially when he is
despised or ostracised.
Interior freedom is not yet possessed by anyone who cannot close
his eyes to the fault of a friend, whether real or apparent.
'There is nothing so precious as a faithful friend' (Ecclesiasticus
6. I 5 ), for he makes his own the misfortunes of his friend and
endures them, suffering with him, even to death. Friends are legion
in time of prosperity. But in the hour of trial scarcely one will be
found.
Only those who keep the commandments carefully, and those
admitted to the secrets of God's judgments, do not forsake their
friends when their friends, by God's permission, are put to the test.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, IV,92,93 ,94,97
(PG 9o,I o69-72)

'Agapeic' love is not a sentimental whim or a physical attraction,
both of which are doomed to fade away quickly, and anyway do not
come at will. No. It is the awareness of God's love for another person.
Only God can enable us to understand our neighbour according to
the 'feeling', the intuition of the 'Spirit'. Then we perceive in him an
irreducible personal existence beyond limitations and errors, beyond

The Difficult Love

279

even the disappointment we may have felt for a moment. The other
is in the image of God, not of us.
When we begin to feel in its fullness the love of God, we begin
also to love our neighbour in the experience of the Spirit. That is
the love of which the Scriptures speak. For friendship according
to the flesh breaks down too easily on the slightest pretext. The
reason is that it lacks the bond of the Spirit. Therefore even if a
certain irritation takes hold of the soul on which God is acting,
that does not break the bond of love. For if it has been set
ablaze again by the fire of divine love, it seeks with great joy
to love its neighbour, even if in return it should have to undergo
wrongs or insults. In fact, the bitterness of the quarrel is entirely
consumed in the sweetness of God.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, I 5 (SC 5 bis, p. 9 2 )

Consider two people who are friends according to the intuition
that is a gift of the Spirit. Despite their peculiarities they will not be
a ble to quarrel because 'mine' and 'yours' have no meaning between
them. Their friendship is a greater thing than possessions.
Two elders who were living together in a cell had never had
any disagreement. So one day one of them said to the other, 'Corne
on, let us have at least one quarrel, like other people.' The other
answered, 'I don't know how to begin.' The first replied, 'I am
going to put this brick between us, then I shall say, " It is mine."
Then you have to say, "No, it belongs to me.'' That is what
leads to strife and arguments.'
So they placed the brick between them. One said, ' It is mine.'
And the other, 'No. I am sure it belongs to me.' The first replied,
' It is not yours. It is mine.' Then the other cried, 'All right. If it
belongs to you, take it! ' And they did not succeed in quarrelling.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anonymous series, 2. 2 I (SO I, P. 3 9 8 )

Love o f neighbour i s more important than prayer.
It can happen that when we are at prayer some brothers come to
see us. Then we have to choose, either to interrupt our prayer
or to sadden our brother by refusing to answer him. But love is
greater than prayer. Prayer is one virtue amongst others, whereas
love contains them all.
j o HN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 26th Step 4 3 ( 5 2 )
( p. I 3 I )

Approaches to Contemplation

280

Practical service of others, with the detachment from self, the
patience, and the true affection that it implies is worth more than
all mortification.
A brother said to one of the elders, 'Here are two brothers. One
never leaves his cell where he prays, fasts for six days at a time, and
gives himself up to all sorts of mortification. The other looks after
the sick. Which of the two lives a life more pleasing to God?'
The elder replied, 'The brother who fasts for six days on end
would not be the equal of the one who looks after the sick, not
even if he hanged himself by the nose.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anonymous series, 224 (SO r, p. 3 3 9 )

Even the book of the Gospels would be better sold if there were
no other means of feeding the hungry. The gift of life is worth more
than the holiest of books. Especially when the book is the price of
life.
A brother had as his only possession a book of the Gospels. He
sold it and spent the proceeds on food for the starving. And he
added these memorable words: 'What I sold was the very book
that tells me: "Sell what you have and give to the poor" .'
EvAGRJUS OF PONTUS Practicus, 97 (SC 1 7 1 , p. 704)

Love desires, and accomplishes as far as it can, an exchange of
lives, when the other person's existence is a slow destruction of the
body and ruthless social ostracism. The importance in the mystical
tradition of the 'leper's kiss' is well known.
Abba Agathon said, 'If I could meet a leper, give him my body and
take his, I should be very happy.' That is true love indeed.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Agathon 26 (PG 6 5 , u 5 )

3 · A Paradoxical Morality

. . . Those who humbly choose what is folly in the eyes of the world
clearly contemplate the wisdom of God himself . . . What could
be more foolish in the eyes of the world . . . than to abandon
one's possessions to thieves? To return no wrong for the wrongs
one has suffered? . . . By virtue of this wise folly, one catches a

The Difficult Love

281

glimpse of God's wisdom, not indeed in all its completeness but
already in the light of contemplation.
GREGORY THE GREAT Commentary on the Book of Job, 27,46,79
(PL 76,444-6)