With trust and humility, in a joy that is peaceful and strong, we
find our true stature as sons in the Son, crowned with flames of the
Spirit. We attain the true royalty which is our freedom.
Be like a king in your heart, on the throne of humility. You
bid laughter: 'Go', and it goes. You bid sweet tears: 'Come',
and they come. You bid your body that is both servant and
tyrant: 'Do this', and it does it.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 7th Step, 40(4 3 )
( p . 66)

4

Passions Transfigured,
Thought Transcended

To 'see' God one must purify one's 'heart', one's 'spirit'. Some
speak more of the 'heart', others more of the 'spirit': Jerusalem
and Athens? Perhaps . . . Indeed it was soon perceived that this
separation is a sign of the fallenness of humanity, but that in the
crucible of grace it becomes possible to unite 'heart' and 'spirit'. This
'heart-spirit' is purified and reconciled with itself, and little by little
becomes aware of the fire it contains. The decisive element here is
the blessed state of 'the pure in heart, for they shall see God.' Even
before there is any question of an ascetical method, what matters
is to change one's life: 'poverty' and 'justice' are not to be kept
apart, as the text of the Beatitudes in St Luke's Gospel underlines.
And as St Augustine reminds us in the following reflections, sand
is thrown in the eyes of the heart not only by a multiplicity of
images, not only by association of ideas, but also by the refusal
to serve one's neighbour in practical ways. To be too busy filling
the coffers prevents one from emptying one's heart so as to make it
attentive to the 'interior Master'. For 'where your treasure is,' says
Jesus, 'there will your heart be also.'
To purify yourself, have faith. You would like to see God. That
desire is good, it is noble, and I challenge you to make trial of
it. You would like to see him? 'Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God' (Matthew 5 .8). Think first of all about
purifying your heart . . . You believe that God is evident to the
eyes like the light . . . But if your eyes were clogged with sand,
would you not have to wash them out before you could see the
light?
Your heart is defiled also. And avarice spreads its murkiness
there . . . Do you not realize that by hoarding in this way you are

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

1 67

covering your heart with mud? How then will you see him whom
you desire?
You say to me, 'Show me your God.' . . .
I answer you, 'Take a look at your heart. Everything you see
in it that might sadden God, remove. God wants to come to you.
Listen to Christ your Lord: "My Father and I will come to him and
make our horne with him" (John 1 4. 23 ) . That is God's promise. If
I were to tell you I was corning to stay with you, you would clean
your house. Now it is God who wants to come into your heart. Do
you not hasten to purify it? How could he dwell with avarice? . . .
God has commanded you to clothe the naked. But avarice induces
you to strip the one who is clothed . . . I am looking at your heart.
What do you have in it? Have you filled your coffers but thrown
away your conscience? . . . Purify your heart.'
AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermons, 2 6 1 , 4 (PL J 8 , 1 20 3 - 4 )

Beyond that, however, everything resolves itself, including the
basic motives of our actions, into those logismoi or dialogismoi of
which Jesus speaks in the Gospels. The usual translation is 'thoughts' .
More precisely they are the seeds o f the 'passions', those suggestions
or impulses that emerge from the subconscious and soon become
obsessive. In the ascetic sense, remember, the 'passions' are blockages,
usurpations, deviations that destroy the human being's basic desire.
They are forms of idolatry, of that 'self-idolatry' that deflects towards
nothingness our capacity for transcendence.
What is it then to be a fool for Christ? It is to control one's
thoughts when they stray out of line. It is to make the mind empty
and free so as to be able to offer it in a state of readiness when
Christ's teachings are to be assimilated, swept clean for the words
of God that it needs to welcome.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM On the Incomprehensibility of God, Sermon 5
(PG 4 8 , 7 10)

It is therefore essential to let the 'heart-spirit' settle like calm
water. Then it becomes a tranquil lake in which the sky is re­
flected, in which the face of Christ can be seen and thereby the
true face of one's neighbour also.
One of the Fathers said, 'In the same way as you cannot see

Initiation for Warfare

168

your face in troubled water, the soul, if it is not emptied of foreign
thoughts, cannot reflect God in contemplation.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers (in T. Merton , p. 77)
It is important to learn how to lead back 'into the house of
the body' the mind that is scattered, pulled this way and that,
put to all kinds of wrong uses. The whole art is to confine the
incorporeal within the corporeal, as St John Climacus was to put
it, with the intention of making it faithful and vigilant, like the
virgins in the parable whose lamps were full of oil in expectation
of the Bridegroom's arrival (Matthew 2 5 . 1 - 1 3 ). One must learn to
keep awake in the silence of the heart.
Let the soul collect its scattered thoughts as if it were recalling
stray children back home to the body. Let it await unceasingly in
sobriety and love the day on which its Lord will come truly to visit
it . . . In this way sin will do no harm to people living in hope
and faith awaiting the Redeemer. When he comes he transforms
the thoughts of the heart . . . he teaches true prayer that remains
firm and unshakeable. Fear not. 'I will go before you and level
the mountains, I will break in pieces the doors of bronze and
cut asunder the bars of iron' (Isaiah 45 2 ) And: 'Keep watch
on yourself that no word in the silence of your heart may make
you an object of reprobation.'
.

.

PsEUDO-MACARIUS Thirty First Homily, 1 (PG 34,728)

The heart that is not purified is a dark abyss, an immensity of
the subconscious, that is not merely individual but pan-human, even
cosmic, containing all the dark side of the world. In the 'upward'
direction it is shut off by death, and in the 'downward' direction
given over as prey to the 'powers of darkness'. Faith and humil­
ity, on the contrary, open the 'upward' way for the heart through
the risen Christ to the 'image of God' that might be termed the
'superconscious'. Thus the divine light penetrates the abyss, and
Christ triumphs there anew over the murderous powers of evil. The
abyss of the heart opens on to the abyss of God.
To refrain from evil is not perfection. Perfection is to enter into a
spirit of humility and to put to death the serpent that is making
its nest and practising murder below even the spirit, deeper than

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

1 69

the abode of thought, in the treasury and storehouse of the soul.
For the heart is an abyss.
PsEuoo-MACARIUS Eighteenth Homily (PG 3 4,63 3 )