When a phrase or a word in a psalm, or in personal prayer,
takes hold of our soul or makes the heart exult, we should stop
and go deep into this 'intuition of God'. We should cease to m ultiply
words, and find rather the silence in the heart of the word, the
Spirit at rest in the Word. Liturgical prayer is of limited assistance
here, as happens in every language when symbol becomes reality.
Multiplicity of words from elsewhere or from afar has not the
same value as that interior cry, that sigh perhaps, that betokens
the dizzying nearness of the Other.
The excellence of prayer does not consist in its quantity but in its
quality, as is shown . . . by this word: 'In praying, do not heap up
empty phrases', and so forth (Matthew 6.7).
EVAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 1 5 1 (Philokalia I, 1 8 9 )

If a profitable reflection comes to you, let it take the place
of psalmody. Do not reject God's gift for the sake of maintain­
ing the tradition [your rule]. A prayer with no inkling of the
intuition of God and no intellectual vision is only a weariness
of the flesh. Do not take pleasure in a multiplicity of psalms. It

Approaches to Contemplation

202

casts a veil over your heart. A single word in intimacy is worth
more than a thousand at a distance.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Pareneticus (Frankenberg, p. s 6 r )

We must learn first o f a l l to bring wayward thoughts back
to the body. The body is the cell for anyone seeking Christ in
the silent depths of the heart. Serious thankful attention to the
humblest feeling, as we shall see, also constitutes a way of con­
templating God through things.
A hesychast [from hesychia: silence, peace, sweetness of union
with God] is one who seeks to confine the incorporeal within
the corporeal . . . the actual limits of his body are the hesychast's
cell. There is an abode of wisdom there.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 27th step, 5 ( 7 ) &
r o( 1 2) (p. r so )

To concentrate the mind and give it peace, to parry the incon­
sequent yet obsessive flux of 'thoughts' or indeed to dry up the flow
of them, the repetition of a short formula can be a help. It is not a
mantra that is efficacious of itself as in India, but a word addressed
to someone, the expression of a relationship, a cry for help, a link
with him whom Augustine calls the 'interior Master'. Here Cassian
gives a formula that was to be retained by Western monasticism.
This is what happens in fact. Our thoughts wander from spiritual
contemplation and run hither and thither. When we return to
ourselves like people waking up, we look for something to revive
our memory of God. But while we are seeking, time passes. Before
we have found anything we are wandering again . . .
The cause of this confusion is quite clear: we do not possess
anything precise, as a formula for instance would be . . . to which
we can recall our wandering mind . . . one thought succeeds another
without stopping, in a perpetual flux in which the soul neither
perceives the origin of its thoughts nor is aware of their flight and
disappearance . . .
Here is that formula for praying that you are looking for.
Every monk who is aiming at a continual recollection of God
should accustom himself to using it in meditation, and that will
enable him to banish other thoughts . . . It is a secret that the few
survivors of the Fathers of the early days taught us and which we

On Prayer

203

in turn confide to the small number of souls who are really thirsting
to know it. To keep yourself continually mindful of God's presence
you should set this formula before yourselves: 'Haste thee, 0 God,
to deliver me: make haste to help me, 0 Lord.' (Psalm 70. 1 ) . This
short verse expresses all the feelings that human beings can have. It
adapts itself to every situation . . . in adversity, for deliverance; in
prosperity, for it to continue without inducing pride; . . . at work,
in your various occupations; on a journey you can also repeat it; . . .
let sleep close your eyes on these words and you will end by saying
them even in your sleep; meditate on them according to Moses's
precept 'when you sit in your house, and when you walk by the way,
and when you lie down, and when you rise' (Deuteronomy 6.7).
joHN CASSIAN Conferences, X, 8 & 1 0 (SC 54, pp. 83, 8 5 -6)
The ascetics of the Christian East made use of a similar formula
in which the appeal for help is made in trustful abandonment: 'Lord
as thou wilt and as thou knowest best, have mercy'. Or simply,
'Lord have mercy', Kyrie eleison. Still today the use of this formula
in Eastern monasticism is much preferred to the invocation of the
name of Jesus, out of humility.
They asked Abba Macarius, 'How should one pray?' The old
man replied, 'There is no need to lose oneself in words. It is enough
to spread out the hands and to say, "Lord, as thou wilt and as thou
knowest best, have mercy. " If the battle is fierce, say, " Help!" He
knows what is suitable for you and he will take pity on you.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Macarius, 1 9 (PG 65 ,269)

Brief formulae of this kind make it possible to pray coming and
going and while working. We then discover that there is much more
time for prayer than we might imagine.
I will show you how I do not cease praying, simply by going on
with my work. I am there sitting in God's presence. And when I
put my little leaves to soak and when I start to weave a rope I
sa y, ' Have mercy on me, 0 God, according to thy steadfast love'
(Psalm 5 1 .3 ) . Is not that a prayer?
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Lucius (PG 65,2 5 3 )

Invocation o f the name o f Jesus comes next, in a variety of
formulae, as will be seen from a reading of the texts that follow. The
prayer 'Lord Jesus, Son of God, have mercy upon me, a sinner' does

204

Approaches to Contemplation

not seem to have taken definite shape before the thirteenth century.
It was to be combined with a method that satisfies, though in a quite
different dimension, the modern concern for efficiency.
In a quite natural way the invocation of the name of Jesus is
combined with the rhythm of breathing. Pray as you breathe.
[Anthony] called his two companions . . . and said to them,
'Always breathe Christ'.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA Life of Anthony, XCI (PG 26,969)

Let your calling to mind of jesus be continually combined with
your breathing and you will know the meaning of silence.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 27th step, 2nd part,
26 (62), (p. 1 5 6)