Through its own transparent 'bareness', the spirit can experience
the infinite, and thus be launched on to the boundless ocean of the
godhead. Essential mysticism, if you wish. What comes to mind here
is the 'bottomless sea of the godhead' of which Ruysbroek speaks
in the Spiritual Marriage, and also Angelus Silesius, noting in his
Cherubic Pilgrim that 'in God nothing is known; he is a unique Unity.
Whatever is known in him cannot but be ourselves.' However, in
Maximus (more clearly than in Evagrius, whom he seems here to
be quoting) the divine essence - or the outpouring of its radiance­
is situated within a personal presence, and is contemplated at the
heart of a meeting, of a communion. Moreover, if we manage to look
behind differences in terminology and our own assumptions about
what is meant, we shall see that the Western 'essential mystics' teach
the same, as Vladimir Lossky has shown with reference to Eckhart in
his Negative Theology and Knowledge of God in Meister Eckhart.
When the mind receives the representations of objects it naturally
copies each of them. When it contemplates them spiritually it
takes on different forms of being according to the objects of its
contemplation. When it is in God it dispenses with any shape or
form whatever.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Centuries on Charity, III, 97 (PG 90,
1 04 8 )

God's love for the individual, when he accepts it, inflames his
heart and his body. He is held up in the presence of the Wholly
Other in a continuing dialogue. This communion enables the divine
life to take hold of him. And here once again there is not only the
symbol but also the reality of an exalted inebriation that transports
him past all limits, whether of modesty or of death, in the direction
of heaven. 'The inebriation leads us into what I might call the domain
of the uncontrollable, the domain of the divine Power that breaks
all bounds, brings down all barriers, and fills us with the Holy
Spirit' (Quoted from a monk of the Eastern Church, La Colombe

Enstasy - Ecstasy

253

et l'Agneau, Chevetogne 1 9 7 9 , p. 6 r ). Meeting and sharing together
- they suggest the picture of marriage, of two people madly in
love.

God's love is by its nature warmth. When it lights on someone
without any limit, it plunges the soul into ecstasy. That is why
the heart of one who has felt it cannot bear to be deprived of it.
But he gradually undergoes a strange alteration in proportion to
the love that enters into him. These are the signs of that love: his
face becomes inflamed with joy and his body is filled with warmth.
Fear and shame desert him as if he had gone outside himself . . . he
is like a lunatic; a terrible death is a joy to him . . . he no longer
has his normal awareness or his natural sight. He no longer knows
what he is doing. Although he continues to act he feels nothing,
as if his mind were suspended in contemplation. His thought is in
continual dialogue with the Other.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 24 (p. 104)
The world is within for the spiritual person. So are the angels,
who are at the same time a personal presence and a translucent
degree of u niversal existence, a universe of music and praise around
the Lord. So too is the Trinity itself who comes to take up its
a bode in him. 'The kingdom of God is within you', Jesus said. A
more-than-subjective fulfilment opens the inner person to the most
real of realities.
Purify yourself and you will see heaven in yourself. In yourself
you will see angels and their brightness, and you will see their
Master with them and in them . . .
The spiritual homeland of the person whose soul has been
purified is within. The sun that shines there is the light of the
Trinity. The air breathed by the entering thoughts is the Holy Spirit
the Comforter. With the person dwell the angels. Their life, their
joy, their cause for celebration is Christ the light of the Father's
light. Such a person rejoices every hour in the contemplation of
his soul, and marvels at the beauty that appears, a hundred times
brighter than the brightness of the sun . . . That is the kingdom of
God hidden within us, according to the words of the Lord.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 43 (p. 1 76-7)
True knowledge is to be aware of all things in God. This brings
such happiness that the heart is consumed in love and the person is

254

Approaches to Contemplation

ready to die for the beloved, that is to say for all and for each one
individually.
Love is sweeter than life.
Sweeter still, sweeter than honey and the honeycomb
is the awareness of God whence love is born.
Love is not loth to accept the hardest of deaths
for those it loves.
Love is the child of knowledge . . .
Lord, fill my heart with eternal life.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 8 (p. 1 64)

Mysteries of the divine embrace. The enjoyment of God fills the
spirit, but also the body. It penetrates and awakens the habitually
unconscious depths of bodily existence. Between sleep and wakeful­
ness, when the frontier can be crossed that separates the conscious
from the unconscious, when the body within the body is exposed,
enjoyment seizes hold of the whole personality. This is the joy of the
Kingdom. This is the joy of the eternal marriage feast.
It happens at certain moments that delight and enjoyment invade
the whole body. And the fleshly tongue can say no more; to
such a degree now have earthly objects become but dust and
ashes. The initial delights, those of the heart, fill us while we
are awake. The spirit burns at the hour of prayer, at the mo­
ment of reading, in the course of frequent meditations or long
contemplations. But the final delights come to us differently, often
during the night, in the following way: when we are between sleep
and wakefulness, when we are asleep without being asleep and
awake without being really awake. These delights invade a person
and the whole body throbs. It is clear then that this is nothing
other than the kingdom of heaven.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 8 (p. 3 9 )

The brightness is sometimes so great that one has to cry out.
This is the ultimate fulfilment of the Song of Songs.
A hundred times mingling love and fervour this [monk] would
kiss the cross . . . then return to psalmody. And the thoughts
that were inflaming him with their heat so burned within him that

Enstasy - Ecstasy

255

he would cry out, giving in to the joy, when he could not bear the
brightness of that flame.
IsAAc OF N INEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 75 (p. 2.94)
There are cries, but also abysses of silence, immersion in an ocean
of light and of silence. The personality is not dissolved. The longing
attacks again; the tenderness is once again embedded in the person.
It is not easy to know how and in what respects spiritual tenderness
overwhelms the soul. Often it is by an ineffable joy and by vehement
aspirations that its presence is revealed. So much so that the joy is
rendered unbearable by its very intensity, and breaks out into cries
that carry tidings of your inebriation as far as a neighbouring cell.
Sometimes on the contrary the whole soul descends and lies hidden
in abysses of silence. The suddenness of the light stupefies it and
robs it of speech. All its senses remain withdrawn in its inmost
depths or completely suspended. And it is by inarticulate groans
that it tells God of its desire. Sometimes, finally, it is so swollen with
a sorrowful tenderness that only tears can give it consolation.
jOHN CASSIAN Conferences, IX, 2.7 (SC 54, p. 63 )