At the beginning of the fourth century the Church had to confront
a heresy which might be called the master heresy, because it is seen
to reappear the moment that the sense of mystery is obscured,
notably in contemporary forms of Christianity that are seeking a
compromise with the world and its ways. For heresy is not j ust a
cultural episode now past. It expresses a permanent temptation of
the human mind in its desire to explain the mystery and to reduce
its scope. Primitive Arianism was not an abstract and complicated
dispute. On the contrary, it was a radical way of simplifying and
'understanding' the incarnation and the Trinity. Arius was a priest
of Alexandria who was skilled in subtle discussions, but his work
very quickly won a popular following which he took care to fos足
ter. With Arianism Christianity became 'easy'. While affirming the
pre-eminence of Christ in the order of created reality, Arius confined
him to that order, positing a radical difference in nature between him
and God. God is God; Christ is the summit of the created world but
always a creature. It is a wholly rational approach according to which
God remains confined within his own transcendence. At a time when
the apparent political victory of Christianity was bringing the masses
into the Church, such a conception seemed to make the faith simpler,
more readily understandable.
Arianism was to confront Christian reflection with some funda足
mental problems: how to account for the simultaneous presence in
God of the Father as 'first', because he is the source and principle of the
godhead, and of the Son of God become Son of Man, who is distinct
from the Father and yet declares emphatically: ' I and the Father are
one.' Or again, how to reconcile the great biblical affirmation of the

374

Theological Notes

unity of God with Jesus's awareness, so clearly defined in the Gospel,
of his own divine identity. By its victory over Arianism, the Church
was to assert decisively the antinomy in God (and therefore in
humanity, his image) of unity and difference.
With Arius the starting point seems to be a conception of God
inherited from Greek philosophy, the God of Aristotle rather than
the living God of biblical revelation. God is conceived as a perfect
essence, enclosed in himself, simple, not admitting any complex足
ity, a reality in the intellectual sphere. The influence of Aristotle
makes itself felt also in the method of thought, in the simplistic
rigour of logical deduction at the expense of unfathomable and
paradoxical mystery technologia not theologia, as a Father of
the fourth century called it.
God was thus defined, with a fatal play on words, as agenetos
and agennetos - agenetos meaning outside all becoming (from
gignomai, I become, with the alpha privative meaning 'not') and
agennetos meaning unbegotten (from gennao I beget, again with the
alpha privative). So not only is God unbegotten, but he could not
communicate his essence to another by begetting him, because such
a begetting would imply a becoming and therefore in the thought
of Greek antiquity a corruption, a division of his essence. The
idea of a begotten God, of a God the Son, of a Son who from
all eternity would be God, therefore appeared contradictory in itself,
the true God being by definition not begotten and not subject to the
becoming that characterizes the created. So everything that is distinct
from the agenetos-agennetos God is necessarily genetos-gennetos,
created-begotten, created because begotten. Christ is that, first and
fundamentally, because being, as Son, begotten, he cannot but be
created. The Word is the first, the original creature, brought into
being to serve as principle and foundation of the universe. He is
not therefore eternal, he has not always existed, he passed from
non-being to being, like other creatures. If traditionally he is called
God, if allusions to his divinity are to be found in Scripture, that
does not mean that he is true God like the Father. It is an image
that Scripture uses also for the righteous. Because of his merits, Jesus
was adopted by the Father and became the receptacle of the Word,
the first creature and the principle of creation. Essentially therefore
he is a perfect moral being, and nothing more.
If that is so, there is no mystery of the Trinity nor is there any
divine-human being. Humanity is not deified in Christ, and humanity
cannot aspire to real union with God. Between God and humanity
there can only be moral union, of which Jesus is the model.
-

Theological Notes

375

It was in order to answer Arianism that the First Ecumenical
Council met at Nicaea in 3 2 5. The profession of faith, the Creed,
was drawn up in the following terms: 'The Son is begotten of the
Father, that is to say, he is of the essence (ousia) of the Father. He is
true God from true God, begotten not created, that is, gennetos but
not genetos, H O M O O U S I O S to the Father.'
The last expression, homoousios toi Patri constitutes the incom足
parable contribution of the Council. This Greek term, which was
compromised in the preceding century by the awkward gropings
towards a first theology of the Trinity, is now taken up afresh, literally
re-created to express an ontology of love. Homos denotes identity.
Ousios refers to ousia which, cleared of the connotation of substance,
designates the act of being, not the neuter of a substance but the
inexhaustible reality of the Living One, of 'him who is'. To say that
the Son is homoousios, 'consubstantial to the Father', is to say that
they are wholly one, with a unity that is not resemblance but identity.
And yet the Son remains the Son, and the Father the Father.
The proclamation of Nicaea framed the mystery of the incarnate
Word without any possibility of compromise. The fact that Christ is
in essence identical with the Father implies the divinity a nd eternity of
the One who becomes incarnate, as john in his Prologue has declared
so emphatically. When the Word becomes incarnate, he integrates
himself into the universe and integrates the universe into himself.
Now, in virtue of the homoousion he has a share in the whole mystery
of God. Thus, in Christ, a fundamental relationship is established
between God and his creation, between God and humankind. For
the first time in so bold a fashion the Church declares that the
incarnation, resurrection and glorification of its Lord have integrated
humanity with God and through humanity the universe.
The definition of Nicaea, however, was bitterly contested for
more than half a century. Many remained Arians or semi-Arians.
To the rejection of Christ's divinity some, after 3 6o, added rejection
of the Spirit's divinity. These latter were called the Pneumatomachi,
those who fight against the Spirit. As for the Emperors, for the most
part they supported Arianism. A transcendent and a uthoritarian
God seemed to them in practice to guarantee their own power
more effectively than a God of love, a suffering God, a Father
who from all eternity gives his Son all that he has, all that he
is, and makes his Spirit rest on him. 'All that the Father has is
mine', Jesus said. The Trinitarian revelation is that of a sacrificial
and liberating Fatherhood which offers the Spirit and destroys at its
very root the relation of master and slave. In our own day a whole

376

Theological Notes