the mountains. For a long time he lived in solitude, then settled at the
monastery of Rabdan Shabbur where, having become blind through
much reading and austerity, he dictated his works to some disciples
who were impressed by his humility and gentleness.
His thought, collected in his Ascetic Treatises, effects a synthesis
of the spiritual currents of early Christianity: Evagrius, who speaks of
the intellect; Pseudo-Macarius, who lays the emphasis on the 'heart';
and Origen, with his nostalgia for universal salvation.
St Isaac who is profoundly Syriac in his sensitivity combines
a particularly sharp sense of the need to break with this world of
anguish with an unlimited tenderness for all creatures crushed by
suffering. At the 'bodily' stage the body has to be pitilessly purged
of its 'carnal rottenness' by fasting, vigils, continence and obedience;
and must be rescued from 'the world' which for Isaac is a collective
name for the passions, a monstrous tangle of possession, power and
sex, all of them masks of death. Ascesis necessarily appears then as
'constraint'. The 'psychic' stage has to free the soul from 'thoughts'
that are foreign to its deepest nature; it has to enable it to discern,
in movements coming from the unconscious, between the 'source
of light' that calms and 'softens' even to tears, and the 'source of
darkness' that hardens and makes agitated and cold at the same time.
At the 'spiritual' stage the heart 'is broken and renewed', it ascends
'from contemplation to contemplation' 'until it reaches the heights
of love, and joy dwells deep within it'. Then, beyond all utterance,
prayer shot through with moments of inebriation and folly becomes
a permanent state. Whether the sanctified person is 'eating, drinking,
or sleeping, the fragrance of prayer is spontaneously exhaled by his
soul'. From then on it is understood that there is no other salvation
but love. What are all our sins but a few grains of sand cast into
the sea in comparison with God's mercy? The only sin, in the
last resort, is not to pay heed to the power of the resurrection.
Universal salvation is not the certainty of a metaphysical system as
in Origen, but the hope and prayer of the saints, since one can only
be saved in complete communion. On love for creatures and objects
Isaac speaks with the most moving of accents. The charity of the
'merciful heart' becomes cosmic, its hope without limits, it prays
'even for serpents', 'even for devils'. Amid universal suffering the
resurrection of Christ enables it to perceive 'the fire of created
things'. Wild beasts, and human beings who are even more wild,
are pacified in the presence of the saint.
It is not therefore surprising that the writings of Isaac of Nineveh
inspired the sternest, but in the end infinitely loving, monastic ascesis

Biographical Notes

347

(love is difficult, let us repeat) and also inspired the Russian religious
philosophers of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, who were pre­
occupied with elaborating a metaphysic of knowledge in communion
and giving to Christianity a real power of transfiguration.
The Syriac text of the Ascetic Treatises has been published by P.
Bedjan, Paris-Leipzig I 909. English translation from the Syriac by
A.K. Wensinck: Mystic Treatises by Isaac of Nineveh I 9 2 3 . A variant
Greek text: Spanos, Athens, I 8 9 5 .
jAMES O F SARUG (c. 449 - 5 2 I )

One o f the great hymn-writers o f the Syriac Church, James was born
at Harra on the Euphrates and studied at the school of Edessa. He
became chorepiscopus of Harra in 502 and bishop of Batnan the
centre of the Sa rug region in 5 I 8. In spite of the Monophysite
environment he remained aloof from Christological controversies
and gave expression to a living and traditional faith in numer­
ous memre, long portions of which were incorporated in different
Syriac liturgies. At an early date he was translated into Armenian,
Georgian, Arabic, and Ethiopian. His memre are rhythmic chants,
each from three to four hundred verses long, and they were read
during vigils, according to the custom introduced by St Ephraim.
His lyricism is Semitic, and his symbols borrowed from nature are
founded on 'biblical typology'.
Hymn to the Mother of God; Paschal Hymn Bickell I

Sophronius Eusebius Hieronymus, patron of the learned and of
translators, author of the great Latin translation of the Bible known
as the Vulgate.
He was born in Dalmatia into a Christian family, came to
Rome in 3 54 and studied very thoroughly grammar, rhetoric and
philosophy there, forming a friendship with Rufinus.
He was baptized about 3 67 . A journey to Trier, where an impor­
tant colony of monks had settled, confirmed him in his own vocation
as an ascetic. In 3 7 3 he felt the irresistible call of the Bible lands,
which gave birth to his other vocation, the service of God's Word.

348

Biographical Notes

At Antioch he mastered Greek. In the Aleppo desert where he lived
as a hermit for three years he learned Hebrew. From then on he
was vir trilinguis, 'a man of three languages'. At Constantinople
before, during and after the Second Ecumenical Council, he struck
up a friendship with the great Cappadocians Gregory of Nazianzen
and Gregory of Nyssa and became a fervent follower of Origenist
exegesis. On his return to Rome in 3 8 2, he became the secretary and
confidant of the aged Pope Damasus. He revised the Latin text of the
New Testament, and that of the Psalms in the Septuagint version
(see note at end ). At the same time Jerome was directing a spiritual
circle of highly born and beautiful ladies, whom he dissuaded from
marriage and encouraged to lead ascetic lives. After the death of
Damasus in 3 8 5 not only was Jerome not elected bishop as he
was hoping, the people accused him of having caused the death,
on account of her austerities, of a girl of whom everyone thought
highly for her goodness and charm. Thereupon he took himself to
Palestine, where he was joined by the wealthy Paula and other devout
ladies of his acquaintance. When he came back from Egypt where he
had gone to visit the monks, Paula settled him in Bethlehem at the
head of a monastery of men, while she herself not far from there
was in charge of several communities of women. It was she who
provided for the building of these houses, as well as hospices for
pilgrims and a monastic school, where Jerome from then on was
to write his commentaries on Scripture. At this point there began
for him an enormous undertaking, the translation into Latin of the
entire Old Testament. He worked at first from the Septuagint text,
and the Psalter produced from it entered by way of Gaul into the
liturgical use of the Latin Church. But from 3 9 1 to 400, because
the Jewish scholars with whom he was working did not accept the
authority of the Septuagint, he translated directly from the Hebrew
original, thus producing the great Latin Bible which in the Middle
Ages came to be called the Vulgate. It is certain that the Masoretic text
(see note at end ) which he used is of later date than that which can be
reconstituted from the Septuagint and the first Latin translations. It is
certain also that on some points the Septuagint represents an advance
in revelation. None the less those ancient translations were full of
errors and obscurities and recourse to the original was essential.
Simultaneously with this work Jerome took part in the Origenist
controversy, becoming as relentless an adversary of Origen as he
had been a partisan of his. He quarrelled with Rufinus. He also
plunged into the Pelagian controversy with such effect that a group
of Pelagius' followers burned his monastery and he himself had a

Biographical Notes

349