Another profoundly evangelical theme i s the 'abiding' o r 'in­
dwelling' of God in us. His 'indwelling' makes us temples of God. We
not only listen to the words of Jesus but we welcome his silence into
our hearts, the mysterious presence of the Father and of the Spirit.
It is better to keep silent and to be, rather than to speak but not
to be. One who truly possesses Christ's words can also hear his
silence in order to be perfect . . . Nothing is hidden from the
Lord but our very secrets are close to him. Let us do everything
in him who dwells in us so that we may become his temples.
IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH Epistle to the Ephesians, 1 5 , 1 -3 (SC 10,
p. 84)

The person becomes the unlimited place where God is.
Fear not the coming of your God; fear not his friendship. He will
not straiten you when he comes; rather he will enlarge you. So that
you might know that he will enlarge you he not only promised to
come, saying, ' I will dwell with them,' but he also promised to
enlarge you, adding, 'and I will walk with them.' You see then,
if you love, how much room he gives you. Fear is a suffering that
oppresses us. But look at the immensity of love. 'God's love has
been poured into our hearts' (Romans 5 . 5 ).
AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermons, 2. 3 , 7 (PL 3 8 , 1 57)

God's coming brings joy, happiness, infinite tenderness. And
grace penetrates the body as well as the soul, for man is a living
unity. 'Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ?
. . . Do you not know that your body is a temple of the Holy
Spirit?' ( I Corinthians 6. I 5 & I 9 )
I f you renounce the life you are leading today and i f you persevere
in your prayer, you will feel that your effort is securing you great
restfulness. You will discover in these slight pains and fatigues a joy
and a happiness that are immense. God's tender love is ineffable. He
offers himself to those who with all their faith believe that God can
dwell in the human body and make it his glorious abode.

Approaches to Contemplation

250

God built heaven and earth to be the dwelling place of the
human race. But he also built the human body and soul to make
them his own abode, so that he might dwell therein and rest there
as in a well kept house . . . 'We are his house' (Hebrews 3 .6).
In their houses human beings carefully accumulate their wealth.
The Lord in his house, our soul and body, amasses and stores up
the heavenly riches of the Spirit.
PSEUDO-MACARIUS Forty Ninth Homily (PG 3 4,8 r 3 -4)

The astronomical discoveries of the 1 7th century showed that
the physical heavens are empty ( but not limitless - curved, Einstein
was to say, and contained, but in what? ) . The technical revolution of
our century has finally emancipated the human race from the bosom
of the earth, seen now as only a derisory planet circling a mediocre
star . . . God and the human race have lost any place in the visible
universe. But those places were only symbols. God is the hidden
God who transcends the perceptible no less than the intelligible.
And amongst us his place is the saint. Or rather, his place is the
human being, the image of God, incapable of being limited to this
world, who cannot be defined except as indefinable. Holiness proves
that. Thus God is the abode of the human race.
And the human being can deliberately become the a bode of
God.
The Spirit is the place of the saints
and the saint is the place of the Spirit.
BASIL OF CAESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 26 (PG 3 2, I 84)

God is the beggar knocking at the door of our soul asking for
love. In the following text which forms a counterpoint to that of
Gregory of Nyssa, quoted in the preceding section, it is not God who
is the banqueting house for us, it is the human being who ought to
be the banqueting house for God. In order to welcome the Word the
soul must be inebriated with the Holy Spirit.
'Bring me into the banqueting house' (Song of Songs 2.4). Why
have I been standing outside for so long? 'Behold, I stand at the
door and knock; if anyone . . . opens the door I will come in
to him and eat with him, and he with me' (Revelation 3 .20).
'Bring me in.' The Word of God is still saying the selfsame

Enstasy - Ecstasy

251

thing today . . . It is to you he is saying, 'Bring me in' - not
just into the house but into the 'banqueting house' - that your
soul may be filled with the wine of joy, the wine of the Holy
Spirit; and thus you may lead the Bridegroom, the Word, Wisdom,
Truth, into your house. So these words may be said even to
those who are not yet perfect: 'Bring me into the banqueting
house.'
ORIGEN Homilies on the Song of Songs, 2,7 (SC 37, p. 92)

Union with God may also be expressed in terms of inward
birth. The soul corresponds to the Blessed Virgin. It recalls the
mystery of the incarnation. And the incarnation is spiritually ex­
tended to holy souls who are thereby preparing for Christ's return.
All the mysteries of the Gospel are not only performed in the lit­
urgy but take possession of us in the spiritual life. The Word is
continually being born in the stable of our heart. ' Even if Christ
were to be born a thousand times at Bethlehem', Angelus Silesius
wrote, 'if he is not born in you, you are lost for eternity.' To
ensure this birth of Christ in us is the true function of liturgi­
cal times and seasons, interpreted inwardly by ascesis, prayer and
contemplation.
What came about in bodily form in Mary, the fullness of the
godhead shining through Christ in the Blessed Virgin, takes place
in a similar way in every soul that has been made pure. The
Lord does not come in bodily form, for 'we no longer know
Christ according to the flesh', but he dwells in us spiritually and
the Father takes up his abode with him, the Gospel tells us.
In this way the child Jesus is born in each one of us.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On Virginity (PG 46,3 24

&

838)

I n order that the dispositions of the Gospel and the things o f the
Holy Spirit may develop in us, their author has to be born in
us.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Against Eunomius (PG 4 5,5 8 5 )

God always wishes to become incarnate i n those who are worthy
of it.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Questions to Thalassius, 22 (PG 90,3 2 1 )

252

Approaches to Contemplation

To be deified is to enable God to be born in oneself.
DIONYSJUS THE AREOPAGITE Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, II, lntro.
(PG 3 ,3 9 2)

4· The Embrace of the Infinite; the Birth of the Glorious Body