The name does not contain the presence (as is the case in magical
formulae or in the religions of antiquity) but it summons it. The
presence of Christ is thus the presence of the Trinity ('Christ', let us
remember, means 'the Anointed', and it is the Father who anoints
and the Spirit who is the unction) . Since human beings are in the
image of God and this image is restored in them and activated by
baptismal grace, the presence is already in them, in their 'heart',
in that most central of centres, that deepest of depths, which is
also openness to transcendence (the physical heart symbolizes and
incorporates the spiritual heart without being entirely identified with
it). But this presence in the heart is unconscious; to call upon it is to
make it gradually more perceptible by uniting heart and intellect.
Let us keep our eyes always fixed on the depths of our heart
with an unceasing mindfulness of God.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 56 (SC 5 bis, p. 1 17)

The Holy Spirit, the Breath of God, is linked to the Word from
all eternity. Therefore when a person's intellect and breathing utter
the name of the Incarnate Word - Jesus - they are united with the
Holy Spirit, and the person breathes and thinks in the Spirit.
The intellect, strengthened by the invocation, finds its connec­
tion with the heart again, and this, or rather the presence in it,
becomes conscious. Intellect and heart together form that heart- spirit
in which a person collects, opens, unifies, harmonizes and enlarges
himself infinitely. It properly constitutes the 'place of God'.

On Prayer

205

Abba Evagrius said, 'I was tormented by the thoughts and
passions of the body, so I went to find Abba Macarius. I said to
him, " Father, give me a word to live by. " Abba Macarius said to
me, "Secure the anchor rope to the rock and by the grace of God
the ship will ride the devilish waves of this beguiling sea . . . " I said
to him, "What is the boat? What is the rope? What is the rock?"
Abba Macarius said to me, "The ship i s your heart; keep guard
over it. The rope is your mind; secure it to our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is the rock who has power over all the waves . . . because it
is not difficult, is it, to say with each breath, "Our Lord Jesus, have
mercy on me: I bless thee, my Lord Jesus, help me. " '
PsEUDO-MACARIUS Coptic Cycle of Sayings, (Annates du Musee
Guimet XXV, p. 1 60)

Then we see, marvellous consciousness of consciousness, beyond
that, the light of our own depths encompassing the world. 'The
heart that is purified becomes in itself a heaven with a sun, moon and
stars . . . ' according to Philotheus of Sinai ( On Sobriety, 27). But this
light is such only because it is open to the Uncreated Light, the light
of the Transfiguration, of Easter, of the Parousia. The 'descent' of the
heart corresponds to Moses's 'climbing' of Sinai. The heart-spirit is an
interior Sinai on which God reveals himself in translucent darkness.
We, in order to endure a fire like this without dying, hide in the cleft
of a rock that is, in fact, the humanity of Jesus. The Light, in this
tradition, is never either 'enstasy' of the intellect alone or a fullness
in itself. It radiates from the face of Christ crucified and glorified. It
is a manifestation of the Father. It is almost the same as the Holy
Spirit. 'The mirror of the soul by its very nature is destined to receive
the features and the luminous image of Christ' ( On Sobriety, 2 3 ) .
When the spirit, having put off the old man, has put on the man
of grace, he will see his own condition at the moment of prayer,
like the colour of sapphire or the sky - what the Scripture calls the
place of God, seen by the Ancients on Mount Sinai.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Practical Chapters, 70 (PG 40, 1 24 3 )

The spirit, when we close all its outlets b y our concentration
on God, demands of us expressly some task that may satisfy its
need for activity. It should therefore be given the Jesus Prayer as
the only occupation that answers fully to its purpose. It is, in fact,
written that 'No one can say "Jesus is Lord" except by the Holy

206

Approaches to Contemplation

Spirit' (I Corinthians 1 2. 3 ) . . . Those who meditate on this holy and
glorious Name continually in the depths of their heart can see also
the light of their own spirit. For if it is entertained with great care by
the mind, the Name with intense emotion destroys all the impurities
that cover the surface of the soul. In fact, it is said: 'The Lord your
God is a devouring fire' (Deuteronomy 4.24). Consequently the
Lord now transports the soul to a great love . . . This Name . . . is the
pearl of great price; on discovering it, one rejoices with unspeakable
joy, and sells all one's possessions in order to purchase it.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 59 (SC 5 bis, p. I 19)

When the soul calls on the 'Lord Jesus' it does so in the Holy
Spirit. For it is only in the Holy Spirit, St Paul says, that we can
confess that Jesus is the Lord . . . It is a loving dialogue that never
ceases, not even in the silence of perfect light, for this light is, in
fact, the substance and, as it were, the halo crowning a meeting of
which we shall never tire.
Grace joins the soul in crying, 'Lord Jesus', like a mother
teaching her child the word 'father' by their repeating it together.
The apostle says: 'The Spirit helps us in our weakness; for we do
not know how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit intercedes for
us with sighs too deep for words' (Romans 8.26).
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 6 1 (SC 5 bis, p. 1 2 1 )

The signs o f entry into hesychia, that is, into the silence, the
peace, the sweetness of union with God, are indicated by St Isaac of
Nineveh in some remarkable words about to be quoted - the sudden
coming, through a verse or a word, of a silence that then remains
- an emotion pervading the whole being, sober, detached, with
charismatic tears dropping quietly from the eyes, without distorting
the face - the momentary union of the intellect and the heart. This last
element is important, showing that it is not a question of mechanical
technique, making the syllables of the prayer coincide with the
beating of the heart, but of praying 'with all one's heart'. Then,
but only by pure grace and 'for a moment', can come the 'plunge'
of the intellect into the heart.
When you give yourself to prayer, if you are, as far as possible, free
from all distraction, and if the verse comes suddenly to a halt on
your tongue and immobilizes your soul in the silence, and if,

On Prayer

207