has been suggested. (The 'Messalians' were Quietists who took little
account of the sacraments and of morality while attaching the utmost
importance to a state of prayer; they sought a more or less physical
experience of the Holy Spirit). There are definite connections between
the thought of Pseudo-Macarius and that of St Basil and St Gregory
of Nyssa who, the last especially, began to make peace with the
Messalian tendency and to bring it into harmony with the life of
the Church. But it is impossible to decide whether the Great Letter
precedes or follows the De Instituto Christiano, the attribution of
which to Gregory of Nyssa remains debatable anyway.
The Macarian corpus is essentially a resolute return to the
sources of the biblical and evangelical sensitivity that characterizes
the earliest monasticism. The primacy of charity, the experience of
light and fire, an anthropology centred on the theme of the 'heart'
that means at the same time the unconscious (the supra- and the
sub- conscious) and the centre of integration of the whole person­
ality. The emphasis is laid, precisely in opposition to Messalian
quietism, on the spiritual combat always having to be taken up
afresh, and on the genuinely evangelical and Pauline ambivalence
of the 'heart', that battlefield of the forces of life and death. Even
after baptism the struggle goes on in the depths of the human
being between grace and evil. Freedom is the freedom to call for
help, to 'cry out' from the utmost despair. Total dispossession 'counting oneself nothing' - enables the grace of the Spirit to con­
vert despair into faith. Neither observances nor virtues have any
meaning, save in and for this humble relationship with God, this
brief repeated prayer - 'I beseech thee, Lord, I beseech thee' - that
needs to sink deep into our souls. Then the fire of the Spirit con­
sumes the forces of evil, burning prayer makes possible the irruption
of the divine light, the very gentle fire of grace, starting from the
heart, imparts itself to the whole human being, to the body also,
giving the soul an extraordinary feeling of 'fullness' ('plenitude')
and 'joy'. The monk who becomes a man of prayer, that is to
say one who practises perpetual prayer, ought to be freed from
any kind of work. The Spirit who plays a principal part in this
spirituality gives, as an extra so to speak, certain charisms - of
speech, discernment, prophecy, healing. The essential thing remains
the becoming slowly aware through patience and hope of 'baptism
with fire and the Holy Spirit'. This Jeads in the end, eschatologically,
to the body no longer containing the soul, but the 'pneumatic' (spirit­
filled ) soul containing the body. It becomes a pneuma sarkophoron,
a 'spirit that bears the body'.

Biographical Notes

359

The Macarian way, even more than the mystical work of the
Cappadocians, made it possible to integrate into the Church the
Messalians' exaggerated cult of charisms, a cult divorced from its
roots. It combined with the Evagrian current of thought to issue,
when the close of antiquity brought a well-balanced spirituality, in
the 'union of heart and intellect' that makes it possible to reconstitute
the 'heart-mind', the true 'place of God'.
Spiritual Homilies PG 3 4,449 - 622. There is an English trans­
lation by A.F. Mason, Fifty Spiritual Homilies of St Macarius the
Egyptian, SPCK London 1 9 2 1 ; The Great Letter, W. Jaeger, Two
rediscovered Works of Ancient Christian Literature: Gregory of
Nyssa and Macarius, Leiden 1 9 5 4 pp. 28 1 -3 5 1

M AXIMUS THE CONFESSOR ( 5 80 - 662)
Maximus completed the synthesis of the Patristic age in the East,
but in close union with the Latin West. He was a ble to keep the
Eastern sense of the unity of Christ in balance with the Western
sense of his duality. He laid a theological foundation for the
mystery of human freedom. The Sixth Ecumenical Council in
proclaiming the existence in Christ not only of the divine will but
also of a human will is the outcome of his reflection, prayer, and
martyrdom.
The publication in 1 973 of a Syriac Life of Maximus makes it
possible to rectify the statements of a later hagiography. Maximus,
we now learn, was not born in the capital city of a noble family, but
in a village of the Golan. He was left an orphan at the age of nine and
entrusted to a Palestinian monastery, a centre of Evagrian thought,
where he was introduced to the Evagrian tradition. In 6 1 4 he fled
from the Persian invasion and resumed monastic life near the capital
at Chrysopolis. But in 626 the Persians threatened Constantinople
itself. Like so many other refugees, Maximus wandered a bout the
Mediterranean until he finally settled at Carthage. There he became
the spiritual son of a great Palestinian monk, Sophronius, who was
to be the Patriarch of Jerusalem when the city fell into Muslim hands.
In the middle of this enormous tragedy, a veritable apocalypse within
history, Evagrian serenity and the Dionysian return of all things
to God no longer corresponded to reality. Sophronius acquainted
Maximus with the spirituality of Macarius, with the conversion of
despair into faith and with the primacy of love. The kenosis of God

Biographical Notes

360

and the corresponding kenosis of the Christian acquire more precise
lineaments in the thought of Maximus, who seems to have written
most of his spiritual works at Carthage.
From 6 3 8 onwards the Empire was making desperate efforts to
achieve reconciliation with the Monophysites (see separate note on
Monophysitism) who were prepared to open their gates to all in­
vaders. Doctrinal compromises were necessary: 'monoenergism' then
'monothelitism' (a single divine operation or will in Christ) . Maxi­
mus, whose eminence as a teacher was now recognized, threw himself
into the theological battle, insisted on the importance of the human
will in Christ, and thereby appeared as a rebel jeopardizing the unity
and strength of the Empire. He sought support from the See of Rome
and prompted the Lateran Council of 649 which asserted that there
were two wills in Christ, for 'He willed and effected our salvation
both divinely and humanly at the same time.' This definition was to be
sealed by the double martyrdom of the Pope and the theologian. Pope
Martin and Maximus were arrested by imperial troops in 6 5 3 and
taken to Constantinople. Pope Martin was condemned to deportation
and died of exhaustion in the Crimea in 6 5 5 - the last Pope to die as a
martyr, the last Pope also to have opposed the temporal power simply
by martyrdom. Maximus was exiled to Thrace, refusing any compro­
mise. In 6 5 8 he was taken back to Constantinople to face complete
isolation. The episcopate, the Patriarch and even Pope Vitalian had
accepted the imperial decrees of silence on the problems causing con­
troversy. Maxim us as a lone prophet was content to reply: 'When the
God of the universe declared Peter blessed for having confessed him in
the correct terms, he showed that the Catholic Church is the right and
saving confession of God's own nature'. The Church at that moment
of history was Maximus. After four years of harsh exile he was con­
demned in 662 by a Monothelite synod. He died on 1 3 August 662,
in the fortress to which he had been banished in the Caucasus.
Maximus' work has the dimensions of a Summa Theologica. He
makes free use, as well, of Aristotelian categories. But the form and
the spirit are those of a mystic.
The world was created by successive divisions and humanity is
invited to effect the corresponding syntheses. It is possible to respond
to that vocation through Christ, who in himself recapitulates the
universe and history. Christ makes available again to humanity its
function as mediator until the End when the communion of saints
clearly exhibits the features of the Christ who comes. Humanity, the
personal image of the Logos, has to discover and present the logoi
of objects, their spiritual essences. Human rationality is thus offered
·

Biographical Notes

361