centuries) after the apostle Peter stayed in that city where the disciples
of Jesus were first called Christians. D uring a persecution in the
reign of Trajan he was condemned to death and sent to Rome
for execution. It was a slow journey, partly by sea, under military
escort, a tragic exodus that became a sort of triumphal progress
as they crossed Asia Minor, where Christians were increasing in
number. At each stage Ignatius was surrounded by the local Church
while more distant communities sent delegations. Before setting sail
over the Aegean, Ignatius wrote six letters to the Churches that
had so welcomed him, and an eloquent plea to the Christians of
Rome not to intervene on his behalf to prevent his martyrdom
for which he was spiritually prepared. Irenaeus and Origen attest
to his being thrown to the beasts.
Ignatius's Letters constitute the basic text, after the New Testa­
ment, for the understanding of the first Christians' outlook on the
world. Everything is centred on the mystery of Christ, a mystery of
which the paradox and the greatness are defended by the bishop of
Antioch against those who see in Jesus only an appearance of human
nature (the Docetists) or the possessor of a secret knowledge reserved
for the chosen few (the Gnostics). 'God's gnosis is Jesus Christ' who
is the Word 'come forth from silence' to take flesh and to raise it up
again. By his flesh that suffers death and by his Spirit that raises it
up again, Christ is our life, a 'pneumatic' (spiritual) fullness to which
we have access through the Eucharist - Ignatius gives this word its
openly sacramental meaning. The Church, which is called 'Catholic'
for the first time by him, meaning 'according to the whole' of truth
and life, is manifested fully in the local eucharistic community around
its bishop, who is designated now 'image of God', now 'image of
Christ'. Ignatius is thus the first witness to the universalization of the
episcopate after the disappearance of the apostles. All local churches
form a single identity in the same faith and the same chalice. Rome,
the Church of Peter and Paul, 'presides over charity', and Ignatius
asks the Romans to be the bishops (episkopoi, 'overseers') of his own
community that is temporarily without its own bishop.
The expectation of an almost immediate Parousia has been
replaced by the awareness of a difficult transition, a slow metamor­
phosis through the death and resurrection in Christ of his true 'dis­
ciples'. The 'disciple' par excellence is the martyr, a living Eucharist,
being humbly and lovingly identified with the suffering and victorious
Christ.
Letters SC r o

344

Biographical Notes

IRENJEUS OF LYONS (c. 1 3 0 - c. 208 )

In contact with both East and West, Irenaeus worked out the first
and largest and soundest synthesis of Christian thought. It was solidly
based on the ancient traditions of the Churches of Asia, securely
founded by St John the Apostle.
A native of Asia Minor, Irenaeus made the acquaintance at
Smyrna of its aged bishop Polycarp, himself a disciple of St John.
Irenaeus came to Gaul where Eastern trading settlements were multi­
plying in the Rhone valley, bringing Christianity with them. In
this way the communities of Lyons and Vienne developed at the
beginning of the second century, speaking both Greek and Latin. In
1 77 while Irenaeus, already a priest, was on a mission to Rome, the
persecution by Marcus Aurelius deprived these young Churches of
their leaders. The aged bishop Pothinus, Blandina and many others
suffered martyrdom. Upon his return Irenaeus was elected bishop of
Lyons and Vienne. He evangelized the villages and countryside of the
Saone, and intervened, around I 90, between the bishop of Rome,
Victor, and the communities of Asia, on which Rome wished to
impose its reckoning of the date of Easter. As a result diversity
was allowed to remain without breaking unity. In addition he had
to cope with an upsurge of Gnosticism. The Gnostics were appealing
to secret apostolic traditions. They rejected matter and the body as
evil, and the Old Testament too because it speaks of the Creator of
matter and the body, whom they saw as a God of evil. They also
claimed to be concerned with the 'perfect', the 'pneumatic' (spiritual),
who need only to be made aware of their divine identity. Against
them Irenaeus wrote Pseudo-Gnosis Unmasked and Refuted, more
commonly known as Against Heresies.
For Irenaeus, Tradition is preserved in each local Church by the
succession of bishops who have received from the Apostles the 'rule
of truth'. There is a living Tradition, the life of the Holy Spirit in
the sacramental and consequently ecclesial Body of Christ. This is
attested by the 'charism of truth' of the bishops. Some of these, in
Churches founded by Apostles, are privileged sources of witness. The
only such example in the West is Rome.
Most importantly, lrenaeus developed a vigorous theology em­
phasizing the reality of the incarnation (and therefore of the flesh),
the unity of the two Testaments, and the positive nature of history.
The Word and the Holy Spirit are the 'two hands of the Father'.
With them he creates, directs, attracts and fulfils humanity. History
appears thus as an immense procession of incarnation. Time is an

Biographical Notes

345

experimentum, an apprenticeship in communion, for God wishes

to deify human beings but without destroying their freedom. Time
enables 'man to grow used to receiving God and God to grow used
to dwelling in man'. Irenaeus does not dramatize the fall. Man, still
a foolish child, easily allowed himself to be deceived. He needs to
undergo the experience of death in order to become aware of his own
finiteness, and to open himself voluntarily to God who alone can give
life. Everything is a dimension of incarnation. The Word never ceases
coming down to humanity in history, to fashion his own Body. The
covenants are specific; those with Adam and Noah are cosmic; those
with Abraham and Moses are historical; both are equally concerns
of the Word. And everything is 'recapitulated' in Christ who is the
definitive, pan-human Adam, as Mary is the new Eve. Henceforward
Christ, the 'head', imparts to all his members the power of the life­
giving Spirit who is at work in the Church. And the Church witnesses
and intercedes for the salvation of all human beings. Through trials
and persecutions, beneath the sun which is Christ, the harvest of
history ripens. And first there will be the 'thousand years' reign' of
which the Apocalypse speaks, an actual transfiguration of the earth,
of which the miracle at Cana constitutes the 'sign and epitome'.
Against Heresies SC 263 & 264 for Book I, 2 I O & 2I I for Book
III, I oo, 2 vols., for Book IV, I 52 & I 53 for Book V; Demonstration
of the Apostolic Teaching P0,1 2-73 1
IsAAC OF NINEVEH or I S AAC THE SYRIAN (7th century)

One of the greatest spiritual figures of the Christian East where his
influence has never ceased to make itself felt, not only in the Syriac
world from Lebanon to South India, but also in the other pre­
Chalcedonian Churches from Armenia to Ethiopia, and especially in
the Graeco-Slav sphere through the Greek translation of his writings
made in the ninth century by two monks of St Sa bas in Palestine. The
influence of St Isaac is particularly noticeable in Russian spirituality,
religious philosophy and literature of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, especially in Dostoevsky. It is emphasized today at Mount
Athas and is spreading to the West.
Isaac was born at Beth-Katrage, the modern Qatar, on the shores
of the Persian Gulf. Already a monk and recognized as a spiritual
master, he was consecrated bishop of Nineveh in the Nestorian Syriac
Church between 66o and 68o. But at the end of five months he fled to

346

Biographical Notes