Woman is a person in the image of God, j ust as man is. Gregory
of Nyssa vigorously emphasizes this assertion of Basil's - which
unfortunately is not as clear in St Augustine and his Western
followers.
Woman is in the image of God equally with man. The sexes are of
equal worth. Their virtues are equal, their struggles are equal. . .
Would a man be able to compete with a woman who lives her life
to the full?
GREGORY OF NYSSA Let us make Man in our Image and Likeness,
2nd discourse (PG 44, 276)

St Basil in the preface to his Ascetica shows how the martial
symbolism that Paul applies to the Christian life is equally valid
for women, and recalls the important part played by women among
Christ's disciples. 'Apostles of the apostles' the Byzantine liturgy
calls the women who brought spices to the tomb and were the first
witnesses of the resurrection.

The Difficult Love

293

These words [of the Apostle] apply not only to men, for women
also belong to Christ's army by the strength of their souls . . .
Many women have distinguished themselves no less than men in
the spiritual warfare, and some of them more . . . It was not only
men but also women who followed Jesus, and he accepted help
from women as much as from men.
BASI L OF C£SAREA Shorter Rules, 3 (PG 3 1 ,624)

The martyr Julitta sealed the assertion of this equality with the
sacrifice of herself.
[To the women surrounding her who were commiserating with
her:] 'We are made of the same dough as men. Just like them
we were created in the image of God . . . Are we not their equals
in everything? . . . To form woman God did not only take flesh
but also bone from the other bones, so that we women like men
are indebted to the Lord for firmness, strength and endurance.' So
saying, she leapt into the furnace.
BAS IL OF CJ£SAREA Homily on the martyr ]ulitta, 2 (PG J I , 24o)

What J ulitta suggests in the language of martyrdom is clarified
by a profound Jewish exegesis: to create woman, God would have
taken, not a rib but a side, a half of the human being, ha adam, which
was created both masculine and feminine.
And if the ordination to the priesthood because of a whole
liturgical symbolism (which is also psychological) is reserved to
men, Christian antiquity was acquainted with charismatic Ammas,
spiritual Mothers, who, equally with the Fathers, A bbas, practised
the discernment of spirits and penetrating insight into souls.
The Church, after all, has never ceased saying that humanity
reaches its highest fulfilment in a woman, Mary, 'mother i n all
truth, of all those who live according to the Gospel' ( Evagrius,
Pseudo-Nilus, Letter r ) . Only the Virgin's assent made the incarna­
tion possible. And Nicholas Cabasilas went so far as to say that God
created humanity in order to find a mother. There exists a mysterious
correspondence between femininity and the most fundamental gifts
of the Holy Spirit. ' You shall honour the deaconesses', the Didascalia
recommends, 'because they hold the position of the Holy Spirit.' Like
the Spirit, or Breath, who in certain respects is motherly (ruach in
Hebrew is also feminine), woman is able to give life.

294

Approaches to Contemplation

During the first three centuries, actions of mutual help were
performed even in the course of the liturgy, in a sacramental context.
When the Emperors were converted and the Church was brought
to assume some responsibility for history, the Fathers never ceased
recalling both the dignity of the person and the need for j ustice,
in order to give a social content to the communion of persons.
Enthusiastically, and sometimes with violence, they took for their
own the appeals of the great Jewish prophets, giving them extra depth
by reaffirming that the poor man is 'another Christ', as is shown by
the j udgement scene in the twenty-fifth chapter of St Matthew. For
them, the earth and all its riches belong only to God, while human
beings receive no more than the benefit of their use, provided that
they accept a fair distribution of resources so as to banish hunger and
misery. 'To possess more than is needed,' St Basil says, 'is to defraud
the poor, to rob them.' And close by his episcopal city he built a large
hospital and guest house to accommodate the sick and the starving.
The Fathers have no ready solutions to offer. They reject both
the conception of private property in Roman law and the systematic
and levelling communism of certain Gnostic sects. But they consider
that when social inequalities reduce individuals - or countries - to
a degrading state of poverty, they are the outcome of the fall, and
the weight of the fall must be countered by God's original plan,
namely the equal dignity of all human beings. This is admirably
exemplified by the original Church of Jerusalem, which practised
the voluntary sharing of possessions. There is a constant need to
rediscover 'almsgiving', which then meant voluntary sharing, and
thus to endure the oppressions of history. The Fathers are not in the
least opposed to what Paul Ricoeur calls the 'short methods' and the
'long methods' of charity, namely mutual help given by one individual
to another, and essential reforms in general. St John Chrysostom, who
laid special emphasis on the sacrament of the brother, multiplied
hospitals and put forward vast plans for social reorganization. It
would be anachronistic to speak of 'socialism' in the Fathers, but
the word socius to define man's attitude to society would certainly
have suited them well. ' You are to love your neighbour as yourself,'
and 'the .sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath,' was
at the root of their inspiration, if by 'sabbath' you mean, as Petru
Dumitriu suggests in his commentary on St Mark's Gospel, not only
ritual directives but also economic and social obligations.
And everything is seen from an ascetic and mystical point of
view. It is Christ himself who has to be fed, welcomed, honoured, by
transforming people into socii, investing them with enough dignity,

The Difficult Love

295