the more God calls it further beyond. Transfiguration and tran­
scendence, enstasis and ecstasis, never cease alternating. The more
God is known, the more he is found to be unknown. (And it is
the same with our neighbour.) The more God makes it possible
for us to share in him (this is 'energy'), the more we aspire to reach
him who eludes us (this is his 'nature'). Thus the soul advances
'from beginning to beginning'. Eternity is inaugurated already here
below in that rhythm of fullness and aspiration. The theology of
the nature and the energy of God reveals itself in this way as an
astonishing metaphysic of communion, of 'relational being'. This has
been propounded in this century by Russian and Greek philosophers
- in particular by Christos Yannaras in his magisterial work Person
and Love, but also in France by Gabriel Marcel and Maurice Zundel,
and by that unassuming and profound French-speaking philosopher
from the Lebanon, Rene Habachi.
The unlimited reality of the godhead that cannot be circumscribed
remains beyond all comprehension . . . Thus great David when he
was seeking exaltation in his heart and was going 'from strength to
strength' (Psalm 84.7) nevertheless cried to God: 'Thou, 0 Lord,
art on high for ever' (Psalm 92.8). By that, I think, he meant to
convey that for all eternity, world without end, anyone who is
hastening towards thee grows ever greater and rises continually
higher, each moment making progress by the addition of graces,
whilst 'Thou, 0 Lord, art enthroned for ever; thy name endures
to all generations' (Psalm 102. 1 2 ) . . . At each instant, what is
grasped is much greater than what had been grasped before, but,
since what we are seeking is unlimited, the end of each discov­
ery becomes the starting point for the discovery of something
higher, and the ascent continues.
Thus our ascent is unending. We go from beginning to begin­
ning by way of beginnings without end.
Nor, whilst ascending, do we cease to desire more, knowing
what we know. Rather, as we rise by a greater desire to one
still higher, we continue on our way into the infinite by increasingly
higher ascents.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Song of Songs, 8 (PG 44,
940- I )

When the soul has become simple, unified, really like God, it
finds fulfilment . . . it clings to the One who alone is really lovable
and desirable. It is unified with him by the living activity of love.

Enstasy - Ecstasy

24 1

It is transformed into that which it apprehends, continually making
fresh discoveries.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Dialogue on the Soul and Resurrection (PG 4 6,

93)
Thus the sanctified soul becomes, as Jean Danielou wrote, an
'expanding universe'.
Sharing in the divine fullness is such that it makes whoever
achieves it ever greater, more illimitable, so as never to cease
growing. Because the spring of all reality flows ceaselessly, the
being of anyone who shares in it is increased in grandeur by all
that springs up within, so that the capacity for receiving grows
along with the abundance of good gifts received.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Dialogue on the Soul and Resurrection (PG 4 6,
I 1 2)
2. Love and Inebriation

The spiritual person is drunk with the wine of love and that wine is the
Spirit, the wine of power and life. It is to comprehend at last, without
any sentimentality, the great Johannine declaration: 'God is love'. It
is the internalizing of the Eucharist; it is to become Eucharist. It is the
breathing, beyond space and time, of the air of the resurrection.
One who has found love feeds on Christ every day and at every
hour and he becomes immortal thereby. For Jesus said: 'Whoever
eats this bread that I shall give him shall never see death' (cf. John
6. 5 8 ). Blessed is he who eats the bread of love that is Jesus. For
whoever feeds on love feeds on Christ . . . as John bears witness
saying: 'God is love' (I John 4.8). Therefore one who lives in love
receives from God the fruit of life. He breathes, even in this world,
the air of the resurrection . . . Love is the Kingdom . . . Such is the
'wine to gladden the heart of man' (Psalm ro4. 1 5 ) Blessed is he
who drinks of this wine . . . the sick have drunk of it and become
strong; the ignorant have drunk of it and become wise.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 72 (Spanos, p. 282)

It is a matter of unity between the Lord and the 'heart that
is aware' - the heart like a chariot of fire goes up to the Lord
and the Lord comes down into it and absorbs it, as the Eucharist

24 2

Approaches to Contemplation

absorbs the communicant. Meister Eckhart's words come to mind:
'The eye with which I see God and the eye with which God sees
me are one and the same eye.'
In union with God,
the heart absorbs the Lord and the Lord the heart,
and the two become one.
Quotation attributed to St John Chrysostom by Callistus and
Ignatius Xanthopoulos, 52 (Philokalia IV,252)

If we are capable of loving, it is because we are responding to
God's love: God first loves us. Love becomes incarnate and comes
to us in Jesus. The Holy Spirit is this love that is poured out in our
hearts. Thus we are loving God by means of God; the Spirit enables
us to share in the love with which the Father loves the Son and
the Son the Father. Love casts us into the Trinitarian realms; the
Trinitarian realms are those of love.
Augustine, almost brutally, cites the example of erotic passion.
If no personal love enters into it the passion subsides. Yet the body
of the other is just as desirable. For that which is loved, and that
by which it is loved, is love, invisible love. Invisible, but the only
thing that enables one to see.
To love God, Augustine says finally, is to sing his glory; or better,
it is to become, ourselves, a song of glory.
He teaches us in this way to understand God as the life of our
life, the soul of our soul, the love of our love.
We only love if we have first been loved. Hear what the apostle
John has to say. He it was who leant on the Master's heart and
resting there drank in heavenly secrets . . . Among the other secrets
which the great seer drew from that source he showed us this:
'We love him because he first loved us' ( r John 4. ro). Ask how
anyone can love God and you will find no other answer than this:
God first loved us. He whom we love has given himself first. He
has given himself so that we may love him. What was his gift?
The apostle Paul states it more clearly: 'God's love has been
poured into our hearts'. By what means? Through us perhaps?
No. Through whom then? 'Through the Holy Spirit which has
been given to us' (Romans 5.5).
Full of this testimony let us love God through God . . . The
conclusion imposes itself on us and John states it for us still more
succinctly: 'God is love and he who abides in love abides in God, and

Enstasy - Ecstasy

243