and according them sufficient equality for friendship to be possible.
' You are putting God on the same footing as your slaves,' thundered
St John Chrysostom. 'Set Christ free, free from hunger, from need,
from prison, from nakedness.' And this effort at sharing is connected,
for the rich, with an ascesis of voluntary limitation, of fasting in the
whole sense of the term. Today, the approach of the Fathers would
be to invite well-fed societies to a collective ascesis that would make
possible a better distribution of the world's resources, and prevent
the gap between the rich and the poor of the planet from growing
constantly wider. It would be to learn to exercise self-restraint for
love of others, as Solzhenitsyn invites us to do.
Brethren, let us not be bad managers of the goods that have
been entrusted to us, unless we want to hear Peter's sharp con­
demnation: 'Shame on you who hold back the possessions of
others. Imitate God's liberality and there will be no more poor'
(Apostolic Constitutions). Let us not kill ourselves heaping up
money when our brothers are dying of hunger . . . Let us imitate
God's law of creation. He makes the rain fall on the righteous
and the wicked and makes his sun rise upon all human beings
without distinction. He gives to all the creatures living on earth
vast spaces, springs, rivers, forests . . . and his gifts ought not to
be appropriated by the mighty nor by governments. Everything
is common, everything is in abundance . . . He honours natural
equality by the equal distribution of his gifts . . .
Human beings have accumulated in their coffers gold and
silver, clothes more sumptuous than useful, diamonds and other
such objects that are evidence of war and tyranny; then a foolish
arrogance hardens their hearts; for their brothers in distress, no pity.
What utter blindness! They do not realize that poverty and riches,
social contrasts and other such distinctions were late arrivals among
human beings. They spread like epidemics. They were inventions of
sin. But in the beginning 'it was not so' (Matthew 19.8) . . . Hold
fast then to that primitive equality, forget subsequent divisions.
Attend not to the law of the strong but to the law of the Creator.
Help nature to the best of your ability, honour the freedom of
creation, protect your species from dishonour, come to its aid in
sickness, rescue it from poverty . . . Seek to distinguish yourself
from others only by your generosity. Be like gods for the poor,
imitating God's mercy. Humanity has nothing so much in common
with God as the ability to do good . . .
You who are Christ's servants, his brethren and fellow-heirs,

2 96

Approaches to Contemplation

while it is still not too late, help Christ, feed Christ, clothe Christ,
welcome Christ, honour Christ . . .
GREGORY NAZIANZEN On Love of the Poor, 24-27,40 (PG
3 5 ,274-7,28 5 )

Why do we fast? To commemorate the Passion of the Lamb who,
before he was nailed to the cross, underwent insults and brutalities
. . . Isaiah teaches us the rules for a pure and sincere fast: 'To
loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the thongs of the yoke,
to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke . . . to
share your bread with the hungry, and bring the homeless poor
into your house' (Isaiah 5 8.6) . . .
Do not despise the poor. Ask yourself who they are and you
will discover their greatness. They have the face of our Saviour
. . . the poor are the stewards of our hope, the guardians of
the Kingdom. It is they who open the door to the righteous,
and close it to the wicked and self-centred. They are frightening
accusers, powerful plaintiffs . . .
Compassion and sharing are things that God loves. They deify
the one in whom they dwell . . . they make him the image of the
primordial Being, eternal, surpassing all understanding.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On Love of the Poor, 1 (PG 46,247)

5 · Hell and the Communion of Saints

For the early Church salvation is not at all reserved to the baptized.
We repeat: those who receive baptism undertake to work for the
salvation of all. The Word has never ceased and never will cease to
be present to humanity in all cultures, all religions, and all irreligions.
The incarnation and the resurrection are not exclusive but inclusive
of the manifold forms of this presence.
Christ is the first-born of God, his Logos, in whom all people share.
That is what we have learned and what we bear witness to . . .
All who have lived in accordance with the Logos are Christians,
even if they have been reckoned atheists, as amongst the Greeks
Socrates, Heraclitus and the like.
JusTIN Apology, 1 ,4 6 (PG 6,397)

It is certainly for Christians to make people understand that
Christ comes for all, since he combines the maximum of humanity

The Difficult Love

297

with the maximum of divinity. But when they fail in this, Christ
himself appears to those who are dying. This, for the first Christians,
is one of the fundamental dimensons of the descent of Jesus into hell.
A descent and a proclamation mysteriously coextensive with all times
and all places.
There has never been a time when the saints did not have the gift
of a spiritual salvation pointed towards Christ.
The Word became man at the final hour; he became Jesus
Christ. But before this visible coming in the flesh, he was already,
without being man, mediator for humanity.
0RIGEN Commentary on John's Gospel, 20, 1 2 ( GCS 4,342) and a
fragment of the Epistle to the Colossians (PG 1 4 , 1 297)

There is only one and the same God the Father, and his Word
has been present to humanity from all time, although by diverse
dispositions and manifold operations he has from the beginning
been saving those who are saved, that is, those who love God and
follow his Word, each in his own age.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,28,2 (SC 1 00 bis, p. 7 5 8 )
Christ did not come only for those who, since the time o f the
Emperor Tiberi us, have believed in him, nor has the Father exercised
his providence only in favour of people now living, but in favour of
all without exception, right from the beginning, who have feared
God and loved him and practised justice and kindness towards their
neighbours and desired to see Christ and hear his voice, in accord­
ance with their abilities and the age in which they were living.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,22,2 (SC 100 bis, p. 6 8 8 )
And therefore 'he descended into the lower parts of the earth'
(Ephesians 4·9 ) , the infernal regions, to take to all the dead the
good news of his coming, for he is the remission of sins for those
who believe in him.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,27,2 (SC 100 bis, p. 7 3 8 )
Does the matter stand otherwise today for unbelievers? Christ
is close to them and they are often following him without realizing
it, 'practising j ustice and kindness towards their neighbours', gaining
a foretaste of the mystery through love and beauty. Christ reveals
himself fully to them at the moment of their death, flooding them with

298

Approaches to Contemplation