a classical education. S o Augustine studied in the great classical
tradition in which he later became a teacher of oratory. But he did
not learn Greek and his knowledge of philosophy was self-taught,
though brilliantly so. His temperament was passionate and sensual
and he rejected the Christianity of his mother, Monica, in favour of
Manicheism. This presented itself as a gnosis, a science of the invis­
ible, professing a metaphysical (and dietary) distinction between light
and dark beings. At Milan he discovered, through a Latin translation,
Plotinus and the deep inner experiences in which a human being could
be identified with the Absolute. The influence of Ambrose who was
then bishop of Milan, the influence of Monica, his reading of the Life
of St Anthony, the epistles of St Paul that he opened unexpectedly at
the unsought suggestion of a child humming, 'Tolle, lege' (Take and
read) and St Paul bidding him to 'put on Christ', all contributed to
his conversion in the summer of 3 86. Augustine received baptism at
the hands of Ambrose during the Easter Vigil in 3 87.
Back in Africa he was soon, against hi s will, chosen by the
people to help the bishop of Hippo (today Anaba in Algeria) first
as priest, then as coadjutor bishop. On the bishop's death Augustine
succeeded him. Henceforward the 'episcopal burden' was his - a
people to teach and protect, and the African Church to defend
from heresy. Augustine had to face the twilight of a civilization.
The barbarians sacked Rome in 4 1 0 and then invaded North Africa,
and were besieging Hippo when Augustine died there. In his City of
God he elaborated a theology of history that shows the irreducible
tension there is between the earthly city and the heavenly city. He
laid the foundations of a Christian culture.
His work is enormous, ranging far and wide, often written in
response to the demand of polemics. He asserts the fundamental
goodness of all that exists, against the Manicheans (for whom 'good'
and 'evil', 'light' and 'darkness', are two separate opposed principles).
In the face of the Donatists he maintains that the Church is the whole
Christ. (The Donatists began by taking up an intransigent attitude
towards those Christians who during the persecutions had renounced
the faith and later repented. They then founded a Counter-Church in
North Africa, administering a second baptism.) Against the Pelagians
Augustine proclaims the sovereignty of grace. For them the human
being is the cause of his own salvation through ascesis and moral
discipline. Augustine shaped the Western approach to the mystery
of God, seeing images of the Trinity everywhere, but chiefly in
h uman nature with its facilities of memory, knowledge-intellect and
love-will. He declares that the Spirit is the joint gift of the Father

314

Biographical Notes

and the Son, though proceeding principaliter ( primarily) from the
Father, and identifies him - for nothing in God can be impersonal ­
with the love that unites the Father and the Son. His experience - a
song of love - is that of the overwhelming irruption of the grace
that alone can set freedom free. But the emphasis is shifted from the
transfiguration of the universe to the tragedy of the human condition.
In particular, in the course of controversy with the Pelagians, who
taught that salvation is won solely by human effort, he so hardened
his systematization as to produce an unacceptable version of the
concept of predestination, where sovereign grace is in the last resort
arbitrary, rescuing the elect from the massa damnata, the massa
perditionis. It is because Augustine's thought has devastated Western
Christianity in these last points, and given rise to the atheism of, for
example, Camus, that it is important to bring Augustine into dialogue
with patristic thought as a whole.
However, the essential point of his work, from the spiritual point
of view, is to be found not only in the Confessions but also in his
commentaries on the Psalms and on St John. There are dramatic
descriptions of desire and of grace, of the insatiable heart that can find
its rest only in God, the theme of 'God and my soul', representations
of a fallen age as saved 'in the present moment', the sketch of an
almost Dostoyevskian concept of salvation through love. His is an
expression of the Tradition that is also very biblical - 'because each
one of us is singing this song of praise, we are a unity in Christ, and
the singer is a single person.'
Commentary on Psalm 41, PL 3 6,464-76; Commentary on Psalm
1 2 1 , PL 3 6 , 1 6 1 8-29; Sermon 23 , PL 3 8, 1 5 5 -62; Sermon 261,
PL 3 8, 1 202-7; Sermon 346, PL 3 8 , 1 5 22-4; Confessions English

translations abound.
BALAI (died 460)
A Syrian religious poet, probably a chorepiscopus (i.e. bishop of a
rural district, from chora, country), of Beroea, the modern Aleppo.
Many of his poems are lost. Those that have survived have found a
place in the Syriac liturgy. They are characterized by a very Semitic
wealth of imagery in which all 'linear' logic disappears amid an
arabesque of symbols.
Hymn for the Consecration ofa New Church is in Bickell I, pp. 77-82

315

Biographical Notes

BARSANUPHIUS (died

C.

540)

The sixth century was marked in the Christian East by the condem­
nation of Origenism that mixed with Christianity the elements of
a Hellenistic gnosis. This return to biblical anthropology, to the
theme of the spiritual 'heart' open to the divine agape, this more
virile and realistic teaching is contained in St Barsanuphius' witness
and correspondence. Of this 'great elder' who is inseparable from
his friend John 'the Prophet' nothing is known except that he was
a recluse in the monastery of Seridos in the desert of Gaza, and that
he exercised his spiritual fatherhood through his letters - a fact that
enables us to receive his teaching just as it was given. He himself, it
seems, was endowed with the gifts of prophecy, discernment of spirits
and, although he was not a priest, the 'power to remit sins', even at a
distance. Emphasis is laid on humility acquired through obedience;
it makes possible the approach to inner freedom, 'freedom from care
and concern' (amerimnia). Profound peace and joy (hesychia), if it
is not to become delusion and pride, must find its expression in
compassion. For those living in the world, humble invocation is
always possible - 'for us, the weak, it remains only to take refuge
in the Name of Jesus' (Letter 3 0 1 ). It gives an awareness of the
presence of God: 'To keep the mind in the presence of God and
speak to him' ( Letter 78). And always the 'fountain of knowledge'
must lead to that 'of love' (Letter r 1 9) .
The Greek text of the Correspondence was published, edited by
St Nicodemus the Hagiorite, at Venice in r 8 r 6, and again, with
improvements, at Vola in 1 9 60. A translation into French made
from more complete Greek and Georgian manuscripts is available
in Barsanuphe et Jean de Gaza, Correspondence, Solesmes, 1 972.
BASIL O F CJESAREA or BA S I L THE GREAT (c.3 29 - 3 79 )

S t Basil, his brother Gregory o f Nyssa, and his friend Gregory
Nazianzen are known as the 'Cappadocian Fathers' from the name
of a province in Asia Minor then strongly Hellenized. They completed
the dogma of Nicaea (the homoousion), by elaborating the great
Trinitarian antinomy of the one Essence and the three Persons (the
'hypostases').
Basil was born into a Christian family which n umbered martyrs
among its members. Several of them while he was young were drawn

316

Biographical Notes