The power of resurrection is given definitively to the Church in the
Eucharist and offered to human beings; it is then up to them to live
in that power, and often the fruits are pitiful. Not only is their witness
feeble, it is discredited. For there are two sides to the Church: on
the one hand, its sacramental depth, the centre of which is the
Eucharist, by which it is the mystery of the Risen Christ, and the
vehicle of resurrection; and on the other hand, its human side, where
people exercise their freedom in laziness or misbehaviour or rebellion,
forcing the Spirit into a kind of 'kenosis', while Christians monopolize
or disfigure or reject the mystery instead of letting it shine through.
This is the history of human fidelity and infidelity where, nevertheless,
there never ceases to be a witness to the the absolute fidelity of God in
the 'golden chain' of holiness, often hidden but never broken . . . The
Church, Origen says, is the harlot whom Christ unendingly washes
with his blood to make her his spotless bride.
There are not only 'wars' outside the Church. There are also
'seditions' inside the Church.
As there are many sinners amongst the pagans, so there are
also many such amongst us members of the Church. That is why
the Lord complains and laments over our sins, saying: 'Alas for me,
I am like a man harvesting straw' (Micah 7. 1 ). If Jesus had good
reason to weep over Jerusalem, he will have much better reason to
weep over the Church. It was built to be a house of prayer, but its
shameful greed and the hateful stupidity of some people - if only
prelates were not among them! - have made it a 'den of thieves', so
that Jesus can repeat, in regard to the sinners dwelling in the living
sanctuary that he had built, the words of the Psalmist: 'What profit
is there in my death, if I go down to the pit?' (Psalm 30.9).
He comes looking for fruit to gather and discovers only a few
pitiful bunches of shrivelled grapes. No fruit that might be good,
very little fruit at all. Who among us would be able to offer the
grapes of virtue? Who might bear fruit by the grace of God ?
0RIGEN Commentary on Matthew, 3 5 (GCS n ,68), Homily on
Jeremiah, XV,3 (PG 1 3 143 2), Commentary on Matthew's Gospel,
r 6,2r ( PG I J , I 44 5 )

Ambrose of Milan, a layman whom the clergy an d laity of the
city had elected bishop much against his will - he actually fled and
they had to compel him - has left us this wonderful prayer, in which
the loftiest vocation of the bishop is expressed. In it he asks first of
all for the grace of compassion, for the ability to weep with the

Initiation for Warfare

128

sinner whose confession he is hearing, whom he is correcting and
consoling.
Where do I find the grace of hearing thee say: 'Her sins, which
are many, are forgiven, for she loved much'? (Luke 7·47). I have
to confess, my debts were greater, the sins that have been forgiven
me more numerous, because I have come to the priesthood from
the uproar of the law courts and the responsibilities of public life.
Therefore I am afraid of being ungrateful. My sins have been more
numerous - and I have loved less.
Guard thy work, Lord, preserve in me the grace which thou
hast granted me, in spite of my flight. I believed I was not worthy
of the episcopate . . . but by thy grace I am what I am, the least,
and indeed the last, of bishops.
Since thou hast granted me to work for thy Church, guard the
fruits of my labour. Thou calledst me to the priesthood when I was
a lost child. Let me not lose myself now that I am a priest.
Above all give me the grace of compassion. Grant me to be able
to have compassion on sinners from the depth of my heart: for that
is the supreme virtue . . . Grant me to have compassion every time
that I witness the fall of a sinner. Let me not arrogantly reprove
him, but let me suffer and weep with him. Do thou cause me when
I weep for my neighbour to weep for myself as well, and to apply
to myself the words: the harlot is more righteous than you are.
AMBROSE OF MILAN On Penance, 11, 8 ,67

&

73 (PL I 6,4 3 1 )

The eucharistic community only makes sense i f i t tries to live
truly as brothers and sisters, following the pattern of the first Church
at Jerusalem which practised the sharing of possessions. When the
faith of the Christian people grows weak, the monks take over, as is
shown by the following text of St Basil, one of those who established
monasticism as a visible element in the Christian community. But the
monks have to be an example and a leaven to lead back the eucharistic
communities to become once again centres of welcome and of mutual
help, where people may recover their energy in an atmosphere of
beauty and loving-kindness. They must be restorative cells capable
of neutralizing the cancers that are gnawing at our societies.
A fraternal community then is. a stadium where athletes are in
training, a good path for progress, a continual stimulus, a constant
concern for God's commandments. Its purpose is the glory of God
according to our Lord's commandments. But it also follows the

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

129

example of the saints, of whom the Acts of the Apostles tell us that
'all who believed were together and had all things in common', and
again, 'The company of those who believed were of one heart and
soul, and no one said that any of the things which he possessed
was his own, but they had everything in common'.
BASIL OF C)ESAREA Longer Rules, 7,4 (PG JO,J 4?)

Why has the Church been spoken of at such length if not
because, as Maximus the Confessor so forcefully says, the spiritual
life has no other aim but to transform the human being into Church,
the temple of the Holy Spirit?

2

The Interior Combat

Ascesis means exercise, combat. 'Spiritual combat, harder than men's
battles', Rimbaud says. As free human beings with a capacity to
'create positively', we are challenged to keep faith with the great
transformation in Christ, such that we transform likewise, in the Holy
Spirit, the relationship that in this world we necessarily have with
material things - our genetic inheritance, psychological and social
background - so that finally we transform the materials themselves.
God did not create death; he did not create evil; but he left to
human beings, as to angels, freedom in everything. Thus through
their freedom some rise to the highest good, others rush headlong
into the depths of evil. But you, man, why do you reject your
freedom?
Why this reluctance to have to make an effort, to toil, to
fight, to become the artificer of your own salvation? 'My Father
is working still,' it is written, 'and I am working' (John 5 · 17).
Are you then reluctant to work, you who were created in order
to create positively?
0RIGEN First Homily on Ezekiel, 3 (GCS 8,3 26).

Ascesis then is an awakening from the sleep-walking of daily
life. It enables the Word to clear the silt away in the depth of the
soul, freeing the spring of living waters. The Word can restore
to its original brightness the tarnished image of God in us, the
silver coin that has rolled in the dust but remains stamped with
the king's likeness (Luke 1 5.8-ro) . It is the Word who acts, but
we have to co-operate with him, not so much by exertion of will­
power as by loving attentiveness.

The Interior Combat

131