At the same time the traditional way of communicating, attested
for example by the text that follows from Cyril of Jerusalem, was
reserved from then on to the clergy, while the faithful were treated
rather like children and received the communion from the hand of the
priest. This was done directly in the West where only the consecrated
bread was distributed to the layfolk, or by means of a spoon in the
East, where communion in both kinds continued to exist.
It must be admitted that the attitude described by St Cyril seems
more in keeping with the spirit of the Gospel. It bears witness on
the one hand to an extreme veneration for the sanctifying power
of the Eucharist, and on the other hand to the trust placed in adults
consciously sharing in the offering of the liturgy.
When you approach, do not present your hands spread out nor
your fingers separated, but make a throne with your left hand for
your right hand since it has to receive the King, and receive the body
of Christ in the hollow of your hand, saying 'Amen'. Take care then
to hallow your eyes by the touch of the sacred body, then consume
it and make sure that you do not lose any portion of it . . .
So after having received the body of Christ in communion,
approach also the chalice of his blood. Do not stretch your hands
out, but bowing in an attitude of respect and adoration and saying
'Amen', hallow yourself by taking also the blood of Christ. And
while your lips are still wet, brush them with your hands and hallow
also your eyes, your forehead and your other senses.
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogical Cathecheses, V,2 1 & 22 (SC 1 26,
pp. 1 70 & 172)

Fasting and a regular discipline of penance are indispensable as
preparation for communion. In the early Church the fast began at
dusk the evening before (the beginning of the liturgical day) and
ended with communion in the early morning. Its aim was, and still
is, to deepen a person's hungP.r for God who gives us himself for
food. One cannot communicate without being hungry.
The mystic feast is prepared for by fasting . . . It is bought at
the price of hunger and the cup of sober intoxication is gained
by thirst for heavenly sacraments.
AMBROSE OF MILAN On Elijah and Fasting, 10,3 3 (PL 1 4,708)

The attitudes of the first centuries make up the Tradition of
the undivided Church, a Tradition that corresponds much better

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

1 25

to the spiritual condition of our own times than that of the times of
Christendom, however moving and worthy of respect the customs
then adopted may have been. Those attitudes could provide useful
guidance in the reforms that are needed or are already developing
in the Christian world today. They would help to avoid either a
strangely individualistic, sacralizing objectivization, or a perfunctory
Eucharist without preparation or mystery, which risks being the
expression of the dominant euphoria of a particular group.

7. Stones and People

'God built humanity so that humanity might build for him': churches,
yes, but also societies, culture, the visible or invisible networks which
sustain a 'eucharistic' relationship between human beings and the
earth. God comes near to us unendingly in the bread of life, the
food of resurrection. Everything has to be built up round this seed
of fire.
When three are gathered together in thy name they already form
a church. Watch over the thousands here assembled. Their hearts
had prepared a sanctuary before our hands built it to the glory of
thy name. May the temple of stone be as beautiful as the temple
of our hearts. Deign to bless both alike with thy Spirit. Our hearts,
like these stones, are marked with thy name . . .
God built humanity so that humanity might build for him.
Blessed be his loving-kindness who has so loved us! He is infinite;
we are limited. He builds the world for us. We build a house for
him. It is good that human beings can build a dwelling for him
who is present everywhere . . .
He dwells tenderly in our midst. He draws us to him in the
bonds of love. He stays with us and calls us to take the path
to heaven to dwell with him . . .
God came among human beings so that they might meet
him . . .
Thine is the kingdom of heaven: ours is thy house! . . . There
the priest offers the bread in thy name and thou givest thine own
body to all for food . . .
Thy heavens are too high for us to be able to reach them. But
behold, thou comest to us in the church, so close.
Thy throne rests on fire; who would dare approach? But the

Initiation for Warfare

126

Almighty lives and dwells in the bread. Anyone who wishes may
approach and eat.
BALAI For the consecration of a new church (Bickell I, pp. 77-82)

A church brings out the meaning of the world by restoring to
the world its spiritual dimension, opening it up to the mystery. And
then the world looks like a church.
The church is the perfect image of the sensible world. For sky it
has the divine sanctuary, and for earth the nave in all its beauty.
And vice versa the world is a church. For sanctuary it has sky and
for nave the grandeur of the earth.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Mystagogia,

3

(PG 9 1 ,669)

Equally, the church expresses the significance of human beings,
their bodies, their souls, their hearts and their minds. They themselves
become a church, making a nave of their bodies - learning by ascesis
to transform their vital energy into love - and a sanctuary of their
souls, where they offer to God the logoi, the spiritual essences of
things - which is the contemplation of the cosmos in God. Finally
they make an altar of their minds, where everything including them­
selves is united to the godhead - and that is the vision of God,
perfect communion, 'deification'.
The church is like a human being. For soul it has the sanctuary, for
mind the divine altar, for body the nave. The church is the image
and likeness of the human being who himself has been created in
the image and likeness of God. By its nave, as by the body, it enables
the gaining of practical wisdom; by its sanctuary, as by the soul,
it gives a spiritual interpretation of the contemplation of nature;
by the divine altar, as by the mind, it reaches the vision of God.
Conversely, the human being is a mystical church. By the nave of
his body he enlightens his active powers . . . by the sanctuary of his
soul he offers to God the spiritual essences of things . . . by the altar
of his mind he invokes the silence in the heart of the divine word,
with a loud voice that surpasses all knowledge. There, as far as is
allowed to humanity, he is united to the godhead . . . and receives
the imprint of its dazzling splendour.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Mystagogia, 6 (PG 9 1 ,684)

Nevertheless, metanoia, repentance, the turning of the intellect
and heart, is necessary for the Church as it is for each of its members.

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

127