Noverim me, noverim te ( i f I knew myself, I should know thee),
says Augustine. In Christ the awareness of the subject leads on to
that of the divine Thou. And he sees in the soul's faculties, in the
memory, the intelligence and the will, the image of the Trinity. To
the Fathers, the image of God in humanity restored in Christ leads
on to the Trinitarian light, towards the Kingdom. When a person by

Enstasy - Ecstasy

237

faith, humility, and the appropriate ascesis perfects the purifying of
the image, it attains to a resemblance of participation. It becomes
wholly translucent to the Archetype.
'The kingdom of God is within you' (Luke 1 7 . 2 1 ) . From this we
learn that by a heart made pure . . . we see in our own beauty the
image of the godhead . . . You have in you the ability to see God. He
who formed you put in your being an immense power. When God
created you he enclosed in you the image of his perfection, as the
mark of a seal is impressed on wax. But your straying has obscured
God's image . . . You are like a metal coin: on the whetstone the rust
disappears. The coin was dirty, but now it reflects the brightness of
the sun and shines in its turn. Like the coin, the inward part of the
personality, called the heart by our Master, once rid of the rust
that hid its beauty, will rediscover the first likeness and be real . . .
So when people look at themselves they will see in themselves the
One they are seeking. And this is the joy that will fill their purified
hearts. They are looking at their own translucency and finding the
model in the image. When the sun is looked at in a mirror, even
without any raising of the eyes to heaven, the sun's brightness is
seen in the mirror exactly as if the sun's disc itself were being
looked at. You cannot contemplate the reality of the light; but if
you rediscover the beauty of the image that was put in you at the
beginning, you will obtain within yourself the goal of your desires
. . . The divine image will shine brightly in us in Christ Jesus our
Lord, to whom be glory throughout all ages.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Beatitudes, 6 (PG 44,
1 2?0)

The Fathers distinguish here, without in any way separating
them, the inaccessible essence of God and the energy (or energies)
by means of which his essence is made inexhaustibly capable of being
shared in. It is a distinction that is inherent in the reality of the divine
Persons and it points, on the one hand, to their secret nature and,
on the other hand, to the communication of their love and their life.
The essence does not imply a depth greater than the Trinity; it means
the depth in the Trinity, the depth, that cannot be objectivized, of
personal existence in communion. The inaccessibility of the essence
means that God reveals himself of his own free will by grace, by
a 'folly of love' ( St Maximus's expression) . God in his nearness

238

Approaches to Contemplation

remains transcendent. He is hidden, not as if in forbidden darkness,
but by the very intensity of his light. It is only God's inaccessibility
that allows the positive space for the development of love through
which communion is renewed. God overcomes otherness in him­
self without dissolving it and that is the mystery of the Trinity
in Unity. He overcomes it in his relations with us, again without
dissolving it, and that is the distinction-identity of the reality and
the energies. 'God is altogether shared and altogether unshareable',
as Dionysius the Areopagite and Maximus the Confessor say. The
energy is the expansion of the Trinitarian love. It associates us with
the perichoresis of the divine Persons.
God as inaccessible essence - transcendent, always beyond our
reach.
God as energy capable of being shared in - God incarnate,
crucified, descended into hell, risen from the dead and raising us
up, that is, enabling us to share in his life, even from the starting
point of our own enclosed hell - God always within our reach.
The energy - or energies - can therefore be considered from
two complementary standpoints. On the one hand is life, glory,
the numberless divine Names that radiate eternally from the es­
sence. From all eternity God lives and reigns in glory. And the
waves of his power permeate the universe from the moment of its
creation, bestowing on it its translucent beauty, masked partially
by the fall. At the same time, however, the energy or energies
denote the actions of God who is living and active, operations
that create and maintain the universe, and then enable it to enter
potentially into the realm of the Spirit, and to be offered the risen
life. All these operations therefore are summed up in Jesus, the name
that means 'God saves', 'God frees', 'God sets at liberty'. In his
person humanity and all creation are 'authenticated', 'spiritualized',
'vivified', since, as St Paul says, 'in him [Christ] the whole fullness
of deity dwells bodily' (Colossians 2.9). The energy as divine activity
ensures our share in the energy as divine life, since what God gives
us is himself. The energy is not an impersonal emanation nor is it
a part of God. It is that life that comes from the Father through
the Son in the Holy Spirit. It is that life that flows from the whole
being of Jesus, from his pierced side, from his empty tomb. It is
that power that is God giving himself entirely while remaining en­
tirely above and beyond creatures.
It may be said in all truth that the pure in heart see God and, at
the same time, that no one has ever seen God. In fact that part

239

Enstasy - Ecstasy

of his nature that is invisible becomes visible through the energies
that are thus revealed about his nature.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Beatitudes, 6 (PG 44,1 269)

We declare that we know God in his energies but we hardly
claim to approach him in his very essence. For his essence remains
inaccessible, whereas his energies reach down to us.
BASIL OF CIESAREA Letter

234

(PG 3 2,869)

God's unique nature, while remaining entirely one, multiplies itself
in powers that communicate being and life . . . and all these mu­
nificent gifts of Goodness . . . make it possible for the unsharable
character of the Shared to be glorified in the sharers as well
as in the shares that are given.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, II, 5 (PG 3 , 644)

We can share in what God communicates to us of his nature, but
his nature in itself remains incommunicable.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR quoted by Euthymius Zygabenus
Dogmatic Panoply, 3 (PG 1 3 0, ! 48)

'We shall see God as he is': that means . . . that we shall
understand the beauty of the divine nature of the Father by con­
templating the glory of him [Christ] who has shone forth from
him.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Commentary on the Gospel ofJohn, r 6,25
(PG 73 ,464)

The energy of the divine nature is common to the Persons [of the
Trinity] while belonging properly to each one of them in a mode
that is fitting to each . . . The energy belongs to the Father, but
through the Son and in the Spirit. It belongs to the Son, but as
power of the Father . . . it belongs to the Spirit, inasmuch as he is
the Spirit of the Father and the Son.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA On the Holy and Consubstantial Trinity, VI
(PG 7 5 , r o s 6 )

The distinction-identity of nature and energy must be under­
stood dynamically. The more the soul is filled, satiated with God,

240

Approaches to Contemplation