The following Syriac hymn emphasizes the same symbolism
of reversal of day and night. Christ's descent into hell has filled
everything with light. Each night recalls Easter. Each dawn announces
Christ's return.
Death had laid its snares
for our humanity.
But he in his mercy came
to rescue us therefrom.
Praise be to thee, Lord of the angels;
the sight of thee has brought joy
to the unfortunates of hell.
From that time night has been far removed.
Night has vanished.
For his light is risen upon his creatures.
He has come down from the heights and set us free.
He has gone up again and, behold,
he is seated at the right hand of God once more.
They burn to go to meet him
at the time of his return,

On Prayer

1 95

all they who waited for him,
faithful to his name.
He entered into hell
and the brightness of his light
scattered the darkness from the souls departed.
The fruit that Adam ate
had slain him.
The Fruit that comes from above
descended for his salvation.
He has broken open the tombs
and restored the dead to life,
mystical figure of the day of his power.
It approaches, it is coming,
the day of resurrection.
Happy is he who waits for it to come.
Great is the day of his coming
when all things that are hidden
shall be revealed.
Those who lie in darkness
shall hear his voice.
On the day of resurrection
they shall go forth to meet him.
Adam is restored to life
and, seized with admiration,
he returns to the domain
of utter felicity.
Syrian hymn attributed to James of Sarug (Evening Office in the
Maronite liturgy)

Let us be precise about the symbolism of standing or kneeling:
for praise, worship and thanksgiving, pray standing up with out­
stretched hands; for penitence or intercession, pray kneeling.
However, there is nothing mechanical or magical about this.
Christianity knows nothing of the oriental technique of postures.

1 96

Approaches to Contemplation

They are only one of many possible languages for communica­
tion, so they have only a relative value. The same applies to place.
When possible it is good to have a peaceful place at one's disposal
for prayer, one furnished no doubt with sacred pictures. But it is
possible to pray anywhere at all.
Certainly there are countless attitudes of the body, but that in
which we stretch out our hands and lift our eyes to heaven is to be
preferred for expressing with the body the dispositions of the soul
during prayer. That at least is the way we should act when there are
no obstacles. But circumstances may lead us to pray sitting down,
for example when we have a pain in the legs; or even in bed because
of fever. For the same reason, if for example we are on board ship
or if our business does not allow us to withdraw to perform our
duty in regard to prayer, it is possible to pray without taking up
any particular outward attitude. In regard to kneeling for prayer,
this is essential when we are accusing ourselves of our sins before
God and entreating him to heal and absolve us. It symbolizes the
prostration and humility of which Paul speaks when he writes: 'For
this reason I bow my knees before the Father, from whom every
family in heaven and on earth is named' (Ephesians 3 · l4l· That
is spiritual kneeling, so called because every creature adores God
in the name of Jesus and prostrates itself humbly before him. The
Apostle seems to be alluding to this when he says: 'At the name of
Jesus every knee should bow, in heaven and on earth and under the
earth' (Philippians 2.10). As for the place, you should realize that
every place is suitable for prayer . . . However, in order to pray
undisturbed it is possible to choose a particular place in one's house,
if practicable, as a kind of hallowed spot, and to pray there.
0RJGEN On Prayer, 3 1 (PG I I ,5 49-52)

In the following text another symbolism appears, j ust as primi­
tive, since according to the Gospels Christ rose on the day after
the Sabbath, on 'the first day of the week'. In the symbolism of the
week, Sunday is Easter, the first and the eighth day, restoring
the origin and anticipating the fulfilment in Christ, the 'Alpha and
Omega'. On that day the faithful should remain standing like sons or
daughters, like people set free, on the road to the Kingdom. A person
standing upright, head held high, bears witness to his true royalty, the
upward movement of his soul toward the heavenly realm. Kneeling
and prostration, by contrast, bear witness to our humiliation which

On Prayer

1 97

we turn into humility. For to prostrate oneself and then to get up
again is a symbol of resurrection.
That is why the First Ecumenical Council forbade kneeling on
Sundays.
Daily prayer is made turned towards the East as a symbol of
paradise lost - lost and regained: the sun rises in the East. And it is
made standing up, though punctuated with prostrations.
We all look toward the East to pray but very few among us realize
that we are seeking again our ancient native land, the paradise
that God planted in the East towards Eden. We make our prayer
standing up on the first day of the week [Sunday] but not all
of us know the reason: it is not only because, being risen with
Christ and being bound to seek the things that are above, we are
reminding ourselves, by standing upright on the day consecrated to
the resurrection, of the grace that has been given to us, but it is
also because this day is in some way an image of the age to come
. . . This day is, in fact, also the eighth day and it symbolizes the
fullness that will follow the present time, the day that never closes
. . . the age that will never come to an end . . . It is therefore
necessary that the Church should bring up her children to pray
standing upright on this day, so that with a continual reminder
of life without end we should not forget to make ready our food
for the journey . . . The upright posture . . . makes our soul, so to
speak, emigrate from the land of the present to that of the future.
By contrast, every time we kneel and get up again we show
by our actions that sin has cast us to the ground and the love of
our Creator has called us back to heaven.
BASIL OF C.'ESAREA Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 27 (PG 3 2,192)

The following text from the second century adds detail to the
symbolism of the upright posture with the hands stretched out, by
likening it to the appearance of the life-giving cross, the whole person
having become a sign of the cross.
I have stretched out my hands in offering to the Lord.
The hands stretched out are a sign thereof,
upright with hands stretched out,
the wood of the cross set up.
Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, 27 (Harris-Mingana,

p.

3 5 6)

1 98

Approaches to Contemplation

To pray everywhere is not only possible, it is a duty, because the
universe is primarily a place of worship. Prayer, by going deep into
transcendence and so demonstrating the human being's transcend­
ence, enables grace to penetrate the creation and reveal its secret
holiness.
Every Christian, even if he lacks any education, knows that every
place is a part of the universe and that the universe itself is the
temple of God. He prays in every place with the eyes of his senses
closed and those of his soul awake, and in this way he transcends
the whole world. He does not stop at the vault of heaven but reaches
the heights above it, and, as though out of this world altogether, he
offers his prayer to God, led by God's Spirit.
ORIGEN Against Celsus, 7,44 (PG I I , 1 4 8 5 )