To find parrhesia, trusting friendship with God, there is no other
way but compassion, or in Greek, 'sympathy', the ability as we said
to suffer with, to feel with. For the person without compassion the
suffering of humanity is an obstacle to knowing God.
Abba Theodore of Pherme asked Abba Pambo, 'Give me a word to
live by.' And with great reluctance he said to him, 'Go, Theodore,
and have compassion on all. Compassion allows us to speak freely
to God.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Pambo, 14 (PG 65,3 7 1 )

For, in fact, compassion comes in the end t o b e united with the
same compassion that God feels for the world. Gregory of Nyssa
speaks of the 'pathos', the passion of God for human beings, of the
'suffering God', the God of feeling. And Pascal wrote: 'Jesus will be
in agony until the end of the world.'

2 75

The Difficult Love

Brother, I recommend this to you: 'Let the weight of compassion
in you weigh the scales down until you feel in your heart the same
compassion that God has for the world.'
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 4 (Spanos p. 1 5 1 )

To love humanity is i n the last resort to be ready to renounce
one's own salvation, provided that they are saved, as Moses and St
Paul prayed.
To love humanity is to share, even to death, the kenosis of God's
love itself which is given in his only-begotten Son.
This is the sign by which to recognize those who have arrived at
perfection: even if they were to throw themselves into the fire ten
times a day for the sake of humanity, they would not be satisfied.
That is what Moses says to God: 'Now, if thou wilt, forgive their
sin - and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou
hast written' (Exodus 3 2.3 2). That is also what the blessed apostle
Paul says: 'I could wish that I myself were accursed and cut off
from Christ for the sake of my brethren' (Romans 9 - J ) .
And above all God himself, i n his love for creation, delivered
his own Son to the death of the cross. 'God so loved the world
that he gave his only Son to death for the world's sake' (cf.
John 3 . r 6) . . So too the saints . . . like God, pour out the
superabundance of their love upon all.
.

IsAAc O F NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 81 (p. 307)

The truly spiritual person draws apart from everyone for the
'one to one' alone with God, but going more deeply and anonymously
into God, finds the self afresh in Christ, in the great movement of
Trinitarian love, no longer separated but united with everyone.
Blessed is he who thinks of himself as the sweepings of all.
Blessed is he who considers the salvation and progress of all as his
own, in fullness of joy.
Blessed is he who regards every human being as God, after God
. . . who is separate from everyone and united with everyone.
EvAGRIUS OF Po NTU S On Prayer, 1 23 , 1 22, 1 2 1 , 1 24 (Philokalia I,
1 87 )

2 76
2.

Approaches to Contemplation

The Demands of Love

Ardent meditation on the cross, that is, on God's unbounded love for
us, banishes all our rancour, resentment and hatred. In the presence of
the immensity of God's forgiveness, the Gospel says, how can we do
other than forgive others? And how can we receive God's forgiveness
if we do not forgive one another?
'Forgive us our trespasses as (to the extent that) we forgive those
who trespass against us,' we pray in the Lord's Prayer.
The remembrance of Christ's sufferings cures the soul of rancour,
so confused is it by the example of Christ's love.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 9th Step, 1 2 ( 1 4)
(p. 7 5 )

On this point, Maximus the Confessor indicates some attitudes
that make it possible to triumph over hatred: realizing that every
refusal to forgive deprives us of Christ; preventing aggressive im­
pulses from expressing themselves in words - in argument, in self­
j ustification, in the sort of psychological analysis that on the pretext
of objectivity or lucidity reduces the mystery of the other person
and becomes a subtle means of destroying him, a shrewd form of
malice - also: not avoiding what annoys or threatens us, but trying
humbly and gently to clear up the misunderstanding and, if that is
not possible, taking the other person into one's prayer, keeping silent,
absolutely refusing to speak evil of him.
Only so can crucified love, secretly victorious, triumph over
the depth of hatred in us that we need to recognize, fight against,
reduce and transform by grace.
Has your brother been an occasion of trial for you? Has your
annoyance led you to hatred? Do not let yourself be defeated,
but triumph over hatred by love. This is the way to do it: by
praying to God sincerely for him; by accepting the excuses others
make for him or by constituting yourself his defender; by tak­
ing responsibility for your trial on yourself and bearing it with
courage until the cloud has lifted.
Be careful, if you were praising the goodness and proclaiming
the virtue of someone yesterday, not to disparage him today as
wicked and perverse, just because your affection has turned to
aversion. Do not seek by blaming your brother to justify your
culpable aversion, but continue faithfully praising him, even if

The Difficult Love

277

you are overcome with annoyance, and you will soon return to
a wholesome charity.
Never wound your brother with ambiguous words lest he pay
you back in your own coin, and both of you depart from sentiments
of charity. But with the frankness of friendship go and reprimand
him, and with the causes of trouble removed, you will both be
delivered from distress and bitterness.
A soul that nourishes hatred against anyone cannot be at peace
with God . . . ' If you do not forgive people their trespasses,' he
says, 'neither will your Father forgive your trespassess' (Matthew
6. 14). If the other will not make peace with you, you at least for
your part must guard yourself from hating him, and pray for him
sincerely without speaking ill of him to anyone.
The whole purpose of our Lord's commandments is to rescue
the spirit from chaos and hatred and lead it to love of him and love
of one's neighbour. From this springs forth, like a flash of lightning,
holy knowledge.
MAXIM US THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, IV,22,27,3 2,J 5 , 5 6
(PG 90, 1 0 5 2, 1 0 5 3 ,10 56,I o6o, I o6 I )

The Gospel requires u s to b e reconciled with o u r neighbour
before bringing our gift to the altar. Accordingly we have to forgive
him, in order to dare to offer a little true love to Christ.
If you want to preserve love as God has asked, do not let your
brother go to bed at night with a feeling of bitterness towards
you. Do not, for your part, retire to rest with a feeling of bitterness
towards him but go and be reconciled with your brother and then
you will come to offer to Christ, with a pure conscience and in
fervent prayer, the gift of love.
MAXIM US THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, 1,5 3 (PG 90,9 7 2)