way the new being that has been received. But these two sacraments
must not be separated unduly. For the humanity of Christ is suffused
with the energies of the Holy Spirit.
Christ was anointed with the oil of gladness, that is, with the
Holy Spirit. The Spirit is so called because he is the source of
joy. You also, you have received the sacramental anointing [the
myron, sacrament of chrismation which in the West became the
sacrament of confirmation]. You have in this way become com­
panions and partakers of Christ.
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogica/ Catecheses, III,2 (SC 1 26,

p.

1 24)

Thus life in the spirit means gradually becoming aware of 'bap­
tismal grace', and this awareness transforms the whole person. The
baptismal sequence of death and resurrection is repeated throughout
our pilgrimage, enlightening its 'initiatory' moments. When every­
thing seems lost, baptismal grace, if we pay heed to it, can convert a
situation of death into one of resurrection, an apparent deadlock into
a necessary breakthrough. We have to learn - and this is the whole
meaning of ascesis - to get round obstacles, to tear away dead skin, to
let the very life of Christ arise in us by the power of his resurrection.
Each present moment has to become baptismal: a moment of anguish
and death if I seek to cling to it and so experience its non-existence,
but a moment of resurrection if I accept it humbly as 'present' in
both senses of the word, almost like the gift of manna - but here
we pass from the mystery of baptism to that of the Eucharist. We
come finally to the moment of agony when we are overwhelmed by
the waters of death. Through our baptism, according to the measure
of our faith, they will be transformed into the womb of eternity.
The monk is one who of his own choice descends to death, who
explores it during this life (in the desert, in the tombs - but where
are the real deserts today? ) . The monk wears himself out sharing
Adam's mourning and exile. His aim is to abandon himself without
further delay to Christ who has conquered death: to see clearly in
hell the dawn of baptism, and already here below to become aware
of his own resurrection in the Risen One. The early Church named
everyone who was truly spiritual (that is, filled with the Spirit) a
'risen one'.
' Baptism in the Spirit' is nothing other than this becoming
aware of baptismal grace, when the water of tears is identified
with the water of baptism and transforms the 'heart of stone' into

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

1 07

a 'heart of flesh' on which the Spirit freely writes, whenever he
chooses, the demands of love.
All the baptized are called, in one way or another, to take this
monastic journey, in order to understand that their death is behind
them; they have no more to fear from the death of the body. Were not
Christians during the first centuries called 'those who have no fear of
death' ? Being now set free from anguish, we are able to love.

4· The Eucharist, Power to make Divine.

We pray in common, for ourselves and for everyone . . . to attain
to the knowledge of truth and grace . . . to keep the commandments
. . . When the prayers are over we give one another the kiss of peace.
Next, bread and a cup of wine mixed with water are brought to the
president of the assembly of the brethren. He takes them, praises
and glorifies the Father of the universe in the name of the Son
and the Holy Spirit, then he utters a long eucharistic prayer as
a thanksgiving for having been judged worthy of these blessings.
When he has finished the intercessions and the eucharistic prayer
all the people present exclaim Amen. Amen is the Hebrew word
meaning 'So be it'. When the president has finished the thanksgiving
and all the people have responded, the ministers whom we call
deacons distribute the consecrated bread and wine to all who are
present and they take some to those who are absent.
juSTIN Apology, l,65 (PG 6,8 3 )

' I a m the living bread which came down from heaven; i f anyone
eats this bread, he will live for ever; and the bread which I shall give
for the life of the world is my flesh . . . Truly, truly, I say to you,
unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood, you
have no life in you' (John 6 . 5 1 - 54).
The Fathers never ceased repeating these stupendous assertions
of Jesus - Jesus is the 'bread of heaven', the ' bread of life' - the
Risen O ne gives himself fully to us in the Eucharist which is thus
resurrection food. Jesus is bread because his body is composed of
the whole life of the cosmos kneaded together by human labour. He
is also 'living bread', life-giving bread, because in him the divine life
permeates the earth and the human race. The Eucharist is therefore
a real power of resurrection, the 'leaven of immortality' as Ignatius
of Antioch says. Certainly, it needs to be received in faith, and there

Initiation for Warfare

108

needs to be an encounter within which the transmission of divine
energy may take place, but its power is 'objective', and independent
of our attitude to it. Our attitude can only encourage (or restrict) the
spread of the eucharistic fire through our soul and body.
The bread of heaven in Christ Jesus.
HIPPOLYTUS OF R o ME Apostolic Tradition (SC 1 1 , p. 54)
He is the bread of life. Whoever eats life cannot die . . . Go to
him and take your fill, for he is the bread of life. Go to him
and drink, for he is the spring. Go to him and be enlightened,
for he is the light. Go to him and become free, for where the
Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom . . . 'I am the bread of life.
Whoever comes to me shall not hunger, and whoever believes in
me shall never thirst' (John 6.3 5 ) .
AMBROSE OF MILAN Commentary o n Psalm
I 2.03)

II

8 , I 8-2.8 (PL I 5 ,

The sacramental realism of the Fathers is total. The bread is
transformed absolutely into the body of Christ, the wine into his
blood. The 'change' is complete and unquestioned.
Christ himself declared, speaking of the bread, 'This is my body'.
Who will dare then to hesitate in future? And when he himself
asserts categorically that 'This is my blood', who will doubt it and
say it is not his blood?
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogical Catecheses, IV,I (SC 12.6,
I 3 4)

p.

The eucharistic body is that of the historical Jesus as well as
·
that of the risen Christ. It is the body of the Child in the crib,
the body that endured the suffering on the cross - for the bread is
'broken', the blood 'poured out' - the body that is risen and glorified.
The term 'body' covers the whole human nature. For God's human
nature since the resurrection and the ascension encompasses the
world and secretly transfigures it. However, Jesus's historical body,
while allowing itself in the foolishness of love to be contained in
a point of space and a brief moment of time, in reality already
contained space and time in itself. For it was not the body of a fallen
individual, crushing human nature in order to take possession of it. It

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

1 09