missions to monks.) In 5 79 Pope Pelagius II ordained him deacon
and sent him as his representative (apocrisarius) to Constantinople.
There he spent six years, influenced more than he was aware no doubt
by Greek theology, especially Origen and Dionysius. He returned to
Rome about 5 8 5 . In 590 a plague ravaged the city. Pelagius died
and Gregory was elected Pope by the clergy and people. Taken
aback, he asked the Emperor not to confirm his election. In vain.
So, courageously, he accepted his charge as consul Dei.
In Italy the political and cultural decadence was so great that
with ruin everywhere, in cities as in people, he could only protect
what was left and avoid anything worse. He ensured the victualling of
Rome by consolidating in Sicily the 'patrimony of Peter'. He reduced
the extent of schism, and had to take the place himself of defaulting
Byzantines in 592 to negotiate a truce with the Lombards. As Pope
of Rome, first bishop of the Christian world, he overcame the temp­
tation hinted at by some of his predecessors, that of consolidating by
j uridical power an authority that was chiefly moral. He made himself
- the title originates with him - 'servant of the servants of God'. He
refused the title of 'universal bishop'; that would infringe, he said,
the prerogatives of local churches whose communion he wished only
to augment. A missionary, he bought some young English slaves, had
them brought up in monasteries, and in 596 sent a group of monks
educated in this way to the English.
Gregory's spirituality is a monastic spirituality of the traditional
type, with emphasis on the 'heart', on 'pure prayer', a humble and
serious experience of light, and on peace (the equivalent of the Greek
hesychia). But this spirituality was made dramatic by the unrest
proceeding from a gigantic crisis of civilization, from Augustinian
influence, and from the difficult alternations of a troubled career
between the urgent demands of service and a taste for the interior
life. It was all resolved for him in the immense patience of Job,
with the certainty that Job is a figure of Christ, and that therefore
the trial leads to resurrection. (The Commentary on the Book of
Job is one of Gregory's masterpieces. ) He did not have to struggle
against heresies - intellectual thought in the West was too feeble
by that time to give rise to any - so his basic aim was teaching
the faith. He was anxious to make available to all, monks, pastors
and also laity, the wisdom of Scripture in Tradition. Hence his
homilies on the Gospel and on Ezekiel, his Pastoral Rule for the
use of clerics and particularly preachers, his endeavour to combine
rather than separate the active and the contemplative life, his re­
course to outstanding examples both biblical and contemporary,

Biographical Notes

335

since God never ceases revealing himself. (It is through this that
we know of St Benedict, from the second book of Gregory's Dia­
logues. ) He developed the use of singing in Church, so that it was
to him that 'Gregorian' chant was ascribed, although it is, in fact,
much later in date. But legend often uncovers the deep meaning of
history.
Commentary on the Book offob (3 5 books) PL 7 5 , 5 09-r 1 26 & 76,97 8 2; SC 3 2 bis, 2 1 2,22 1 ; Homilies on the Gospels, PL 7 5 , 1 07 5-I J I 2;
Homilies on Ezekiel, PL 76,7 8 5 - 1 092
GREGORY NAZIANZEN (c.3 3 0 - 3 90)

Cultured, too cultured; and probably the most profound among
the Greek Fathers; known as the 'Christian Demosthenes' for his
mastery of the art of rhetoric, and 'The Theologian', that is, the
celebrant of the Trinity, whose own life and human words to describe
it are 'theology' par excellence.
Like all the great Cappadocians, Gregory belonged to a circle
of great landowners who might also with a touch of humour be
called 'gentlemen farmers', men of a broad cultured humanity, fer­
vent Christians in that time of transition between martyrdom and
monasticism. His mother had converted his father who later be­
came bishop of Nazianzus. Gregory, a child of their old age, 'of­
fered to the Lord' from his birth, received a sound religious edu­
cation but a bsorbed the cultural heritage of Hellenism in the best
schools: at Caesarea in Palestine, at Alexandria, and especially at
Athens where he formed a friendship with Basil of Caesarea. On
his return to Cappadocia he became an orator destined for the
highest civil appointments. But his soul was divided, somewhat
romantic, with a nostalgia for solitude, speculation and contempla­
tion, though eager also for admiration and affection, a melancholy
and unreliable temperament, at once desirous of responsibilities and
quickly dismayed by them. Involved against his inclination in the
service of the Church he let himself be saddled with commitments
which he soon afterwards refused to honour. His father ordained
him priest, and he disappeared for several months into a 'desert'
peopled with intellectuals, in order later to take up his ministry and
ardently to defend the poor. About 3 7 r, to counter the imperial
power, Basil increased the number of dioceses and put his own
supporters in them. He consecrated Gregory bishop of Sasimus but

336

Biographical Notes

Gregory refused to occupy his see which was a dusty and noisy
stopping place for caravans. At the death of his father, the faithful
of Nazianzus demanded him as their bishop. He ran away into
solitude and study for four years. However in 3 79 this delicate,
complex, awkward intellectual outdid himself: he agreed to leave
for Constantinople where the Arians were in possesssion of all the
churches and were turning the inhabitants into fanatics. In a private
house, under the sign of the resurrection (Anastasis) he opened a
chapel. His preaching, and in particular his five Theological Sermons
on the Trinity attracted the people. It was in vain that trouble-makers
were sent to insult and stone him. In 3 8 I the Emperor Theodosius,
a Spaniard faithful to the Nicene dogma, came into the city. A
Council, later to be designated the Second Ecumenical Council,
was able to assemble, and in it the teaching worked out by Basil
and Gregory triumphed. Gregory was proclaimed Archbishop of
Constantinople. But the intrigues and tensions of the Council quickly
discouraged him. He resigned, and passed the last years of his life on
his estate at Arianzus, writing poems, one of which is an autobio­
graphical Song, the first specimen in Christian literature of the 'secret
colloquy', artistically represented, 'of the soul with itself and God'.
In his sermons, which are half way between rhetoric and liturgy,
Gregory celebrates above all the mystery of the Trinity which he
opposes to the closed monotheism of the Jews and the vague divinities
of paganism. The 'hypostases' which, each in its own way, contain
and present the divine 'essence' are distinguished from one another
by relations of diversity, simple tokens for recognition: the Father by
his character of unoriginated origin; the Son by generation; the Spirit
by procession. Thus is worked out at a level of Trinitarian theology
the metaphysics of the Person who is not a fragment of the whole
but contains it in communion. The Absolute is thus permeated
with an infinitely personal love.
The controversy with Apollinaris (for whom, in Christ, the
Logos takes the place of the human soul) led Gregory to develop
a spirituality of deification as Christification: like our body and our
soul, our spirit (nous) can only be deified by sharing in Jesus' deified
human spirit or soul. Many of Gregory's texts that celebrate our
death and resurrection in Christ entered into the Byzantine liturgy.
'The cross is the only theologian', the cross alone, death and life,
could transform anguish into faith in Gregory's heart.
Sermons PG 3 5 ,3 6 also in SC 24 7, 2 50; Theological Sermons SC 2 5 o;
On Virginity, in Poems II, I : PG 3 7 , 5 3 7- 5 5

Biographical Notes

337

GREGORY O F NYSSA (c. 3 3 0 - c. 3 9 5 )