All that is known of him is that he lived after John Climacus and
Maximus the Confessor, between the end of the seventh and the
tenth centuries. He was the superior of the monastery of Batos
on Sinai. Whilst effecting a synthesis of Evagrius, Diadochus, and
Climacus, he lays the emphasis on 'watchfulness' (nepsis) and victory
over 'thoughts' by the 'Jesus prayer', the invocation of the Name of
Jesus in time with one's breathing. His originality consists in this
very personal and trustful relationship with Christ. For him it is
a matter of 'breathing Jesus'.
On Vigilance and Virtue PG 9 3 , 1 479-1 544 & Philokalia I,q 1 - 1 7 3
HILARY OF POITIERS (3 1 5 - 3 67)

Hilary is the most important Father of Roman Gaul, the 'Athanasius
of the West' as the defender of the 'consubstantial', and also a
connecting link between Greek and Latin theology.
He was born at Poitiers, into a cultured pagan setting, that of
the landowners and magistrates of Aquitaine, by then the most
Romanized of the provinces of Gaul. For a long time he was a
searcher after God. He moved from hedonism to stoicism, he tried
out sects and esoteric cults, he discovered Judaism, and in the end
was converted to Christ by the reading of St John's Gospel. Shortly
after his baptism he was elected bishop of Poitiers by the people,
about 3 50. It was then that he composed his Commentary on St
Matthew's Gospel, in which his teaching about the Trinity remains
in the tradition of Tertullian, without much trace of the Arian
dispute. But the Emperor Constantius in the hour of victory sought
to impose Arianism on the West. Some bishops in Gaul yielded, at the
Synod of Beziers in 3 56. Hilary then assumed the leadership of the
resistance in Gaul. He was exiled to Asia Minor. It was a fruitful but
stormy exile. Hilary deepened his knowledge of the Greek language
and Greek theology, entered into the confused controversies over
the homoousion, and tried in vain to win over those for whom
Christ was homoiousios, 'similar in nature', to the Father but who
baulked at the dogma of Nicaea. It was in Phrygia that he wrote his
great doctrinal work, inaccurately called On the Trinity. When the
Arians gained a lasting superiority they sent him back to the West
as he was a nuisance to them.

Biographical Notes

34 1

Back in Gaul he took advantage of political events (the accession
of Julian) to procure the triumph of the doctrine of 'consubstantiality'
- at the Synod of Paris in 3 6o - and he restored peace, allowing
repentant bishops to retain their sees.
Having failed in his attempt to root out Arianism in Milan ( 3 60),
Hilary gave up polemic and devoted himself to the interpretation of
Scripture. He wrote an introduction to spiritual exegesis, the Treatise
on the Mysteries, and commentaries on the Psalms and Job, all in the
spirit of Origen, whose symbolism and typology he spread in the Latin
world.
In an ample and difficult style Hilary, for the first time in the
West, clearly asserted the eternity of the generation of the Word.
The Father is infinite in his creativity, the Son is in his image,
namely Beauty, the Spirit is his grace, that is, Joy. The Infinite,
which nothing can circumscribe, for the sake of our joy takes the
form of Beauty. At the heart of Hilary's thought is the mystery
of the Word made flesh, of the form of the slave become that of
Beauty. He emphasizes the glory of the transfigured Christ, but
maintains, against Origen, the solid reality of created being. The
eschatological fullness that we attain to in Christ transforms matter
itself, and through the 'eye of the heart' the 'eternal light' reaches the
body also. In this way the principal themes of Eastern spirituality
came over by way of Hilary into a West more accustomed to a
moral approach to Christianity.
On the Trinity PL 1 0, 2 5 -472

HIPPOLYTUS OF R OME ( 1 70 - 23 5 )

Hippolytus was a member of the presbyterium a t Rome a t the
beginning of the second century. Nothing is known of his origins
that were perhaps Oriental. He was very conservative and wrote in
Greek at a time when Latin was coming to prevail in the Christian
community at Rome. He was the author of erudite essays, among
the first in Christian literature, and of long denunciations of heresies,
especially Gnostic ones. His Apostolic Tradition is a sort of code
of regulations for structures and disciplines in the Church. Into
this collection Hippolytus inserted eucharistic prayers which are
the oldest known for the Roman community - and from these
comes the Second Eucharistic Prayer in the Canon of the Mass

342

Biographical Notes

used by the Catholic Church since the liturgical reform. In 2 I 7
Hippolytus refused to recognize the election of Callistus a s bishop
of Rome and had himself elected in opposition to him by a group of
the faithful who were few in number but influential, thus bringing
about a schism. Socially conservative, he reproached Callistus for
having authorized the marriage of Roman ladies of the upper class
to men of inferior rank. He was a rigorist and accused others of
undue indulgence towards sinners. As a denouncer of heresies, he
saw a tendency to Sabellianism (which regards the Father, the Son
and the Spirit as temporally successive aspects of God ) in his own
environment. But he himself connected the generation of the Son
with the creation of the world - a tendency to a certain subordi­
nationism common enough then, especially at Alexandria. In 23 5 in
the persecution by Maximinus the two rivals were sentenced to penal
servitude in Sardinia. They both died there, confessors of the faith,
Hippolytus having first asked his faithful to renounce their schism.
Apostolic Tradition SC I I bis

HoMILY FOR EASTER (anonymous: 4th century)

For a long time it was attributed either to Hippolytus of Rome or
to an unknown editor inspired by a treatise on Easter by Hippolytus
now lost. Today these hypotheses have, in fact, been abandoned
since critical internal evidence shows that this writer is familiar
with Arianism and rejects it (Christ is called God), but it is prior
to the condemnation of Apollinarianism (in which the Spirit of Christ
is identified with his divinity: is it 'spirit' with a capital letter or not?
- an ambiguity not possible at the end of the fourth century). This
homily is therefore later than 3 25 and earlier than 3 80.
Critical text in Homelies pascales I SC 27

IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH (martyred between I I O & I I?)

Ignatius, a converted pagan, was apparently the first bishop of
Antioch ( according to Eusebius of Caesarea the author of an Ecclesi­
astical History written at the beginning of the fourth century that
gives us unique information about the Christianity of the first three

Biographical Notes

343