narrow escape from death. He conducted a polemic, vigorous and
at times cruel, against those who called in question the superiority
of monasticism and virginity. He proved to pagans, with his De Viris
Illustribus, which goes from Peter to Jerome himself, that Christians
counted among their number as many great men as they, and even
more. The H uns and the Bedouins came and went and from time
to time he had to flee. In 4 r o the barbarians sacked Rome. But
Jerome was well aware of the relativity of history. He continued
to give his attention to the writing of polished Letters, and countless
generations were to pray the Psalms and nourish themselves on the
Word of God thanks to him.
Letters: some of the best are found in the Loeb Classical Library,
edited by F.A. Wright I 9 54 ·
Note on Septuagint: The Septuagint version i s the Greek translation
of the Bible made at Alexandria in the third century B.C. According
to legend the seventy translators working separately arrived at the
same text. D uring the patristic age this version, the only one known
to the a uthors of the New Testament, was considered as the true Bible
of the Church, on certain points marking a progressive revelation or
testifying to an older state of the text than the Masoretic version.
None the less, the Septuagint was not without errors which can be
corrected only by recourse to the Hebrew.
Note on Masoretic text: The Masoretic version (from masorah,

transmission) is the text of the Hebrew Bible as fixed by the Pharisee
rabbis at the Synod of Jamnia in 90 - 9 5 A.D.

jOHN CHRYSOSTOM ( 3 44/3 54 - 407)

John, surnamed in the sixth century 'golden-mouthed' ( Chrysostom),
was the famous preacher of God as the 'friend of humankind', as
the one who in Christ became the brother of the poor. He bore
witness, even to death, to an uncompromising ethic of ecclesial and
social service. He was the marvellous liturgist who gave form to the
celebration of the Eucharist. The 'Liturgy of St John Chrysostom' is
still constantly in use in the Orthodox Church today.
He was born at Antioch into an aristocratic family. At a very
early age he was left an orphan by the death of his father. Through

350

Biographical Notes

the psychological effects of this, as quite often happens in the case of
churchmen, he was profoundly influenced for good by the faith of his
mother, who when John reached the age of eighteen wanted to keep
him near her at home as a 'house monk'. He studied Scripture under
the direction of teachers of the school of Antioch who emphasized
the actual human nature of Christ.
But he also studied pagan rhetoric, the procedures of which he
was to use in his sermons, while retaining an ambivalent attitude
towards Hellenism: sometimes he violently denounced it, sometimes
he' sought consolation from it, even from Stoic detachment in the
trials that beset the end of his life. He quite soon tore himself away
from his mother and retreated to the mountains where he threw
himself into a fierce unrelenting monasticism, animated by a total
contempt for human society. Then came a terrible crisis of conscience.
Was not monasticism a 'holy deviation' anyway? Was it right to keep
oneself 'pure' on the 'heights' while leaving one's brethren to perish?
He came to the decision that, since the world was now nominally
Christian, what was needed was to Christianize the world.
Back in Antioch he was ordained a deacon in 3 8o and a priest
in 3 86, not without hesitation. In his Treatise on the Priesthood
he brings out the sacrificial meaning of that service. He preached
indefatigably, sometimes for two hours at a time, amidst acclamation
and applause from the people. He wrote commentaries on Scripture,
in particular the Epistle to the Romans: everything is grace, there­
fore 'if we will we can'. Since the world, including the Emperor,
was Christian, he preached against the reactionary minorities that
exercised a corrupting influence, against the Jews especially as for
ever accursed - these are basic texts for a Christian anti-semitism
- and he denounced above all superstitions, profane festivals, and
the theatre. (The 'Christianization' of the theatre is often on the
short view j ust moralization; but allowance must be made for the
transition from a 'theatrical' to a 'liturgical' civilization) . Against
the lust and idleness of the rich, he praised the communion of
goods, work and the liberation of slaves, issuing a summons to
individual and collective sharing - he outlined a plan for eliminating
poverty from Antioch - for 'mine and thine are empty words'; what
counts is use that is common to all. For John Chrysostom the
social element is sacramental in virtue of the twenty fifth chapter
of St Matthew; the poor man like the priest is 'another Christ';
the 'sacrament of the altar' must be carried out 'into the street' by the
'sacrament of the brother'. At the same time, this man who for so long
had been a fierce ascetic and doubtless dreamt of transforming

Biographical Notes

351

society into a vast monastery, this glorifier of vtrgmtty, gradu­
ally came to affirm that marriage is the 'sacrament of love', the
family a 'little church' and true virginity is a spiritual chastity that
can co-exist with human love.
In 3 97, m uch against his inclination, John was chosen as Arch­
bishop of Constantinople, because of his reputation as an orator. In
the capital he won the people's hearts, he increased the number of
hospitals and centres of reception, he evangelized the countryside, in­
cluding the Goths who were settling in the Empire. He waged a relent­
less war against heretics, but he refused the support of the secular arm.
He concluded his admirable homilies On the Incomprehensibility
of God with the words: 'The Inaccessible comes down to us by
love: the Son, the invisible image of God, makes himself visible
through the incarnation. To see God is to meet Christ and one's
neighbour.' John adds precision to the vocabulary of prayer and of
nepsis, a 'fasting of the spirit'.
But here, in confrontation with power, we see him above all as
the purifying apostle. He resists Eutropius, the all-powerful minister,
when he wishes to a bolish the right of asylum, yet protects him
against a riotous mob when he falls from power and takes refuge in
the basilica. John sought to reform the higher clergy and to prevent
the bishop of Alexandria from persecuting Origenist monks. He
sought also to improve the moral tone of the court and especially of
the Empress, that 'modern Herodias'. His enemies combined against
him. His illegal deposition in 403 proved only momentary. But
in 404 he was exiled to Lower Armenia and remained there for
three years, free, but under surveillance. He learned the patience
of Job and the primacy of charity. He found that hell matters less
than losing the presence of the Kingdom. He discovered that the
cross was p ublic and the resurrection secret, yet the true glory is
identified with the cross. His correspondence, however, in particular
with an old friend the deaconess Olympias, together with the influx
of visitors, many of them from Antioch, alarmed the civil power,
which decided to deport him to the shores of the Black Sea on
the eastern border of the Empire. It was a long and exhausting
journey, on foot. At Comana he prepared himself for death. He
clothed himself in white, received Holy Communion, prayed for
those present, and breathed his last, saying: 'Glory be to God for
everything.'
On the Priesthood SC 272; On the Incomprehensibility of God SC
28; Homilies: On Ozias PG s 6; On Matthew PG 5 7-8; On john PG

352

Biographical Notes

5 9; On I Corinthians PG 6 r ; On Hebrews PG 6 3 ; On Compunction
PG 47; On the Treason of judas PG 49

jOHN CASSIAN (c.3 50 - C.4 3 5 )