The true miracle, the most difficult achievement, is therefore the
example and the practice of love in the spiritual sense of that word
(and here the Gospel speaks of agape, the Latin caritas) . To enter
into God is to let oneself be caught up in the immense movement
of the love of the Trinity which reveals the other person to us as
'neighbour' or (and this is better) which enables each one of us
to become the 'neighbour' of others. And to become a 'neighbour'
is to side with Christ, since he identifies himself with every human
being who is suffering, or rejected, or imprisoned, or ignored. We
need only call to mind the Last Judgement scene in the Gospel
according to St Matthew: " I was hungry and you gave me food,
I was thirsty and you gave me drink, I was a stranger and you
welcomed me, I was naked and you clothed me, I was sick and
you visited me, I was in prison and came to me" . . . " Lord, when
did we see thee hungry and feed thee, or thirsty and give thee
drink? And when did we see thee a stranger and welcome thee,
or naked and clothe thee? And when did we see thee sick or in
prison visit thee? " And the King will answer them, " Truly I say
to you, as you did it to of the least of these my brethren, you did
to me'" ( Matthew 2 5 . 3 5-40).

Approaches to Contemplation

272

The love which is agape discovers that each individual, and
especially each one who is suffering, is a sacrament of Christ, 'another
Christ' as St John Chrysostom says. The human being is a creature in
relationship, after the likeness of the Triune God.
After having given us these seeds which he cast into our hearts, the
Lord comes to look for the fruits and says, 'A new commandment
I give to you, that you love one another' (John 1 3 .34). Although
he wished to stir up our souls to keep this commandment, the
Lord did not require prodigies or unprecedented miracles of his
disciples, as proof of their fidelity - although he had given them,
in the Spirit, the power to perform them. But what did he say
to them? 'By this all will know that you are my disciples, if you
have love for one another' (John 1 3 .3 5 l· He combines these two
commandments in such a way as to assign to himself the benefits
we confer on our neighbour. 'For I was hungry,' he says, 'and you
gave me food.' And he adds, 'As you did it to one of the least of these
my brethren, you did it to me' (Matthew 25.35). Thus by means of
the first commandment it is possible to keep the·second, and by the
second commandment to go back to the first; by loving the Lord to
love also our neighbour, for, 'He who loves me,' says the Lord, 'will
keep my commandments,' and 'My commandmentment is that you
should love one another as I have loved you'.
BASIL OF CiESAREA Longer Rules, 3, 1

&

2 (PG 30,340)

Take the analogy of the circle, or better still of its radii. The
radii are separate. But at the centre they meet. To approach the centre,
which is God, is to have the revelation of one's neighbour. For only
by revelation does one know another person as a person, with a
knowledge that is also unknowing. Love is poverty, kenosis. Knowing
one's neighbour is inseparable from an attitude of non-possession.
This is the nature of love: to the extent that we distance ourselves
from the centre [of the circle] and do not love God, we distance
ourselves from our neighbour; but if we love God, then the nearer
we draw to him in love, the more we are united with our neighbour
in love.
DoROTHEUS OF GAZA Instructions (SC 92, p. 286)

Mystery and splendour of the body of Christ: members of
Christ, we are all, as Paul writes, 'members one of another'. This

The Difficult Love

273

is to see the whole of humanity as consubstantial, one person only,
in the most realistic of senses. In this spacious body love circu­
lates as divine-human blood.
An elder said, 'I have spent twenty years fighting to see all human
beings as only one.'
Sayings of Those who Grow Old in Ascesis (SO I, p. 407)

This unity through Christ finds expression in the Holy Spirit
whom the whole of Tradition, from St Paul and St John onwards,
designates the spirit of communion. This is nothing other than the
translation into the human situation of the majestic unity of the
Trinity.
When perfect love has driven out fear, or fear has been transformed
into love, then everything that has been saved will be a unity
growing together through the one and only Fullness, and everyone
will be, in one another, a unity in the perfect Dove, the Holy Spirit
. . . In this way, encircled by the unity of the Holy Spirit as the bond
of peace, all will be one body and one spirit . . . But it would be
better to quote the very words of the Gospel literally: 'That they
may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me and I in thee, that
they also may be in us' (John 17.2 1 ) . Now the bond of this unity
is glory. And that this glory is the Holy Spirit, anyone familiar
with Scripture will agree if he is attentive to the word of the Lord:
'The glory which thou hast given me, I have given to them' (John
1 7.22). He has indeed really given them such glory when he said:
'Receive the Holy Spirit' (John 20.22).
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Song of Songs, I 5 (PG 44,
I I I 6)

The sanctified person is someone no longer separated. And he is
only sanctified to the extent that he understands in practice that he
is no longer separated from anyone or anything. He bears humanity
in himself, all human beings in their passion and their resurrection.
He is identified, in Christ, with the 'whole Adam'. His own 'self ' no
longer interests him. He includes in his prayer and in his love all
humanity, without judging or condemning anyone, except himself,
the last of all. He is infinitely vulnerable to the horror of the world,
to the tragedies of history being constantly renewed. But he is crushed

274

Approaches to Contemplation

with Christ and rises again with him, with everyone. He knows that
resurrection has the last word. Deeper than horror is the Joy.
Those who have been judged worthy to become children of God
and to be born from on high of the Holy Spirit . . . not infrequently
weep and distress themselves for the whole human race; they pray
for the 'whole Adam' with tears, inflamed as they are with spiritual
love for all humanity. At times also their spirit is kindled with
such joy and such love that, if it were possible, they would take
every human being into their heart without distinguishing between
good and bad. Sometimes too in humility of spirit they so humble
themselves before every human being that they consider themselves
to be the last and least important of all. After which the Spirit makes
them live afresh in ineffable joy.
Pswoo-MACARIUS Eighteenth Homily, 8 (PG 3 4,79)
Our spiritual life and death are at stake in our relations with
others. We are reminded of St John of the Cross: 'On the last day
we shall be j udged by our love'.
Abba Anthony said again, 'Life and death depend on our neighbour.
If we gain our brother we gain God. But if we scandalize our brother
we are sinning against Christ.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anthony, 9 (PG 65,77)