I t i s the same with desire a s i t i s with strength. Eros has to
be transformed into eagerness for a meeting, for the content of a
personal relationship. The texts we are considering, being monastic
in character, speak only of the metamorphosis of eros in relation to
the personal God. But one might think here also of its metamorphosis
in the relationship of a man and a woman, each of them in the light
of God recognizing the other as a person.
I have seen impure souls who threw themselves headlong into
physical eros to a frenzied degree. It was their very experience
of that eros that led them to interior conversion. They concen­
trated their eros on the Lord. Rising above fear they tried to love
God with an insatiable desire. That is why, when Christ spoke of
the woman who had been a sinner, he did not say that she had
been afraid, but that she had loved much and had easily been
able to surmount love by love.
jOHN CLJMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, s th Step, 6(28)
(p. 57)

Thus God must be loved also with all the strength of eros. Then
eros is transformed and subsumed in agape, the spiritual love that
comes from above. The Fathers do not oppose these terms. Agape
without eros would remain weak, powerless, mere moonshine, just
as eros without agape would be a dark destructive force. This op­
position is brilliantly described by Dostoyevsky in The Idiot where
he compares the unarmed agape of Mushkin with the blind eros of
Rogozhin - both qualities bring death to the woman who aroused
pity only or desire only . . . Together eros and agape constitute a
creative virility, like the sun, joining heaven to earth.
Human nature cannot express the overflowing abundance of
divine love. Accordingly it is symbolized by what is most violent
in the passions that excite us, I mean the passion of love, in order
that we may learn thereby that the soul, which has its eyes on the
beauty of the divine nature, must be as much enamoured of it as
the body is with that which is akin to it, changing passion into

1 76

Initiation for Warfare

detached joy, so that our soul is 'erotically' on fire in us with
the flame of the Holy Spirit only.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Sermons on the Song of Songs, 1 (PG 44, 777)

It is not a question of crushing the life in us but of restoring to
the soul its spiritual youthfulness.
We are not asked to tear out or annihilate the natural activities of
the soul but to purify them. That means we have to rid it of the
defilements and impurities with which our negligence has covered
it, so that it may be restored to its natural youthful brightness with
the native vigour that belongs to it.
0RIGEN Sermons on joshua, 22,4 (GCS 7,4 3 6)

Nothing exists - anger or lust - that does not have some share
in what is good. That fact is the basis of metamorphosis. Good in the
Greek sense is, of course, the fullness of being. Even a blind desire for
a better life should be respected. What is necessary is not to eliminate
desire but to free it by showing that its impetus is· opposed to death
and that only the resurrection of Christ can satisfy it.
Without some share in what is Good nothing has ever existed,
nothing does exist and nothing could exist. Take lust, for example.
It is devoid of Good because of its senseless covetousness . . . but
that does not prevent it taking its share in what is Good by means
of the feeble echo that remains in it of fellowship and tenderness.
Likewise anger has a share in what is Good because of its innate
impulse, the desire to improve what seems evil and bring it back
to what appears a better state. Even the person who desires the
worst of lives, in so far as the desire is to live, and to live what
seems a better life, by the very desiring, by the desire to live and by
the aiming at a higher life, that person has a share in what is Good.
If what is Good were entirely suppressed, there would no longer
be any life, nor desire, nor purpose, nor anything else.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, IV, 20 (PG 3 ,720)

Detachment gives a person royal power, thus it is said that 'The
city belongs to you'. Indeed, 'It is the gateway to God', but only the
gateway.
Once upon a time there was a Greek philosopher who told
one of his disciples to give money to anyone who insulted him,

1 77

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

for three years. At the end of this period of testing the master said
to him, 'Now you may go to Athens to learn wisdom.'
Entering Athens the disciple met a wise man who was sitting
by the city gate insulting all the passers-by. He did the same to
the disciple who immediately burst out laughing. ' Why do you
laugh when I insult you?' demanded the wise man. 'Because for
three years I have been giving money to those who insulted me,
and now you are doing it for nothing.' 'Come into the city; it
belongs to you', replied the wise man.
Abba John who was in the habit of recounting this story would
add: 'That is the gateway to God.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers (in T. Merton,

p.

6o)

Truth is metamorphosis. All our powers of life and of passion
are unified in the crucible of 'insatiable love'.
In one whose whole spirit is inwardly turned towards God, even
covetousness gives strength to the burning love for God, even the
power of anger is directed with a single impulse towards divine
love. That person has become, through sharing in the divine light
over a long period, full of light himself. The power of the elemental
forces, thus unified, is transformed into a burning insatiable love.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Centuries on Charity, Il,48 (PG 9o,r ooo)

The soul is made perfect when its powers of passion have been
completely directed towards God.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, III,98 (PG 90, 104 8 )

It is exactly in this way that the destructive passions are set aside
- less by exhausting oneself struggling against them, than by opening
oneself to a fullness of life and joy and awareness that removes their
limitations and harnesses their power.
It is not by fighting against the passions that one prevents them
entering the heart. That is achieved rather by the gratification of
conscience, by the knowledge with which the soul is filled, and by
the desire for its own acts of contemplation.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 8 (p. r 6 5 )

PART THREE

Approaches to
Contemplation

1

On Prayer

1 . W'hat is Prayer?

Any increase in the depth of existence, any perception of mystery in
the presence of love or of beauty or of death, leads to prayer. Yet
for there to be prayer in the Christian sense of the word a specifically
personal relationship has to be established with the living God, a 'con­
versation' as Evagrius puts it. The word should be taken in a broad
sense. It may be silent listening, a cry of distress, a celebration; it may
also be Job's plaintive challenge. The disposition we need to cultivate,
even when care weighs heaviest, is that of remembering that God
exists and loves us; that we are not alone, lost, ridiculous in the pres­
ence of nothingness or horror; that there is Another whom we may
approach in union with Christ, in him, in the depths of our being.
Prayer is a conversation of the spirit with God. Seek therefore the
disposition that the spirit needs, in order to be able to reach out
towards its Lord and to hold converse with him without any
intermediary.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 3 (Philokalia I, rn)