The spiritual person hides the faults of others, as God protects
the world, as Christ washes our sins in his blood, as the Mother of
God stretches the veil of her tears over the human race . . .
It was said of Abba Macarius the Great that he became, according
to the writings, a god on earth, because in the way God protects
the world, so Abba Macarius would hide the faults he saw as
though he had not seen them, and the faults he heard about as
though he had not heard of them.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Macari us the Egyptian 3 2 (PG 6 5 ,
273)

How could anyone who judges himself - and discovers thereby
the cross as 'judgment of j udgment' - dare to j udge others? He will
rather go to join the condemned and ostracised sinner, as Christ came
to seek humankind even in hell.
It happened that one of the brothers at Scete committed a serious
sin. The elders held a meeting and asked Abba Moses to join
them.
He however refused to come. The priest sent him a message in
the following terms: 'Come, the community are waiting for you.' So
then he arose and started the journey, carrying an old basket with
a hole in it. He filled it with sand and dragged it behind him.
The elders went to meet him and asked him, 'Father, what
does this mean?' The old man answered, 'It is my sins running out
behind me and I do not notice them. That is how I am coming
today to judge the sins of another.'
Upon hearing this they said nothing to the brother and par­
doned him.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Moses, 2 (PG 65,28 1 - 3 )

The Difficult Love

285

A brother who had sinned was expelled from the church by the
priest. Whereupon Abba Bessarion rose and went with him, saying
'I too am a sinner.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Bessarion 7 (PG 6 5 , 1 4 1 )

And now tw o stories full o f humour, the humour o f the desert,
about thieves. Here non-violence, as Gandhi had understood, does
not only express a radical detachment, it is also practical, paradoxical
love that overwhelms the guilty man, awakens the person in him, and
makes him attentive to his true destinty.
Abba Anastasi us had copied on very fine parchment, worth eighteen
gold pieces, the whole of the Old and New Testaments. One day a
brother came to see him and, noticing the book, took it away with
him. That same day, when Abba Anastasius wanted to read the
book, he noticed that it had disappeared and he realized that the
brother had taken it. But he did not send anyone to question him
for fear he might add a lie to his theft.
Now that brother went to the neighbouring town to sell the
book, for which he asked sixteen gold pieces. The buyer said to
him, 'Let me have it to see if it is worth that price.' And the buyer
took it to St Anastasius, saying to him, 'Father, have a look at this
book, and tell me whether you think I ought to give sixteen gold
pieces for it. Is that its value?' Abba Anastasius replied, 'Yes, it is
a fine book. It is worth that price.' The buyer went back to find the
brother and said to him, 'Here is your money. I showed the book to
Abba Anastasius who considered it a fine book and judges it to be
worth at least sixteen gold pieces.' The brother asked, 'Is that all he
said? Did he not make any other remarks?' 'No,' replied the buyer,
'not a word.' 'Well, I have changed my mind,' said the brother. ' I
no longer want to sell this book.' Then he hurried back to Abba
Anastasius and begged him with tears to take back his own book.
But the Abba refused, saying, 'Go in peace, brother, I make you a
present of it.' But the brother answered, 'If you do not take it back
I shall never have any peace any more.' And the brother stayed with
Abba Anastasius for the rest of his life.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers (in

T.

Merton, p. 4 9-50)

One day some thieves said to an elder, 'We have come to take away
everything in your cell.' He replied, 'My sons, take everything you
want.' Then they took all that they could from the cell except

286

Approaches to Contemplation

for a little bag that was hidden and went away. But the elder fol­
lowed them, shouting, 'My sons, take this bag that you forgot.'
Abashed at the attitude of the elder, they brought back what
they had taken, and did penance, saying, 'That elder is truly a man
of God.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anonymous series 2.06 (SO

1 , p.

3 9 2.)

It is better to tell a lie to save a person than, by telling the truth,
to hand him over, to surrender him, even if it is not a bandit who is
pursuing him, as in Kant's celebrated example, but a police officer,
who is seeking him in order that j ustice may be done. The spiritual
person, in a radical departure from Kantian principles, tells a lie and
lets the criminal go free, for the grace of God.
Abba Agathon one day questioned Abba Alonius, saying, 'How can
I control my tongue so as to tell no more lies?' And Abba Alonius
said to him, 'If you do not tell a lie, you are set to commit many
sins.' 'How is that?' he asked. And the old man replied, 'Suppose
a man has committed a murder before your eyes and fled into
your cell. The police officer looking for the man asks you, "Has
a murder been committed in your sight? " If you do not tell a lie,
you are delivering that man to death. It is better that you should
hand him over to God unbound, for God knows all things.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Alonius, 4 (PG 65,1 3 3 )

4 · In the world but not of it

Consider the witness that is given by a Church that is full of joy,
though persecuted. It is persecuted but deeply faithful, as is the
case today in several countries.
The attitude of these Christians displays neither aggression nor
compliance, neither the temptation to lose their identity in the world
by following its fashions, nor the opposite temptation to set them­
selves apart by making themselves externally distinct. Christians
conform to the law so long as it does not contradict their conscience.
In the latter instance - and we have seen this in the case of the
martyrs - they disobey, but accept the sanctions of the law. Their
basic requirement is not to overturn the law but to rise above it.
Their behaviour is by way of example and intercession. In a society
governed by Roman law which accords an absolute and indisputable
value to private property, they practise mutual assistance and, with

The Difficult Love

287