This book is intended not so much to popularize its subject as to
make it known in the first place. Not only is Christianity something
strange to people today, but it cannot even attract by its strangeness,
because people are familiar with the distortions and caricatures of
it which are constantly being hawked about. Therefore, in response
to many requests, I have tried to allow the chief witnesses of the
undivided Church to speak for themselves, to make audible the voice
of Tradition, from which all the Churches spring and which alone
enables them to share in an 'ecumenism in time', by recalling the
experience in which they had their common origin.
Tradition is not a written text with which we can choose to agree
or disagree; it is not material suitable for dissection by scholars. It is
the expression of the Spirit juvenescens, as Irenreus of Lyons says,
'in its youthfulness'. It is of course our foundation history, but it is
also a living force, a tremendous 'passover', a passing over from the
God-man to God-humanity and to the universe, to quote the Russian
religious philosophers, whose disciple I gladly acknowledge myself to
be.
There can be no doubt that since the fourth or seventh century our
spiritual awareness has changed profoundly. We live in the aftermath
of Auschwitz, Hiroshima and the Gulag. Christendom, the society
in which Christianity was, to the great detriment of freedom, the
dominant ideology, has finally collapsed, and we can no longer talk
about matters of faith in the way that we used to do. The living
God is no longer the Emperor of the World but crucified Love.
Remember that many of the witnesses whose voices we are about
to hear lived in times of persecution, when society veered between
scepticism on the one hand and various forms of gnosis on the other.
Others lived during the emergence of the monastic movement, which,
in the face of the blandishments of the 'establishment', sternly and

10

Introduction

recklessly asserted the irreducible nonconformity of the person who
is 'drunk with God', the one who, 'after God, regards his brother
as God'. Newman compared the early history of the Church to the
opening chords of a symphony, when the subjects which will later be
brought out one by one are introduced all together in a concentrated
burst of creativity. It was in 553, after all, that the Fifth Ecumenical
Council reaffirmed that God 'suffered death in the flesh'. In making
my selection I have been guided by Tradition, continuing into our
own time, which is a time of darkness worthy of a vision of
Dostoyevsky, teeming with expectations and intuitions, while seeds
of fire multiply in the earth beneath.
The witnesses whose words I have gathered are known as 'the
Fathers'. Some of these first mystics were martyrs, others were monks
in the mountains and deserts. Others were great minds illuminated
by the Spirit, which penetrated even through their foolishness (which
Tradition has been able to balance against the consensus of other
Fathers). Many were bishops, elected by their people to be pastors of
local churches, secure and independent at the heart of their spiritual
communities, where they preached the only 'good news' which can
possibly reach us today in our state of hopeless nihilism: the 'descent'
of the God-made-man into death and hell so that he might triumph
over death and hell in whatever shape they appear.
In those days mysticism was not analysed in terms of religious
psychology as it is in the West today. The whole of life, the whole
universe was interpreted in the light of Christ's death and resur­
rection, which was the key to understanding all significant processes
of change. A few individuals, to be sure, shone out like candles
or torches. But 'the light and the fire' which was concentrated in
them is offered to all in the dazzling flesh of the Bible and the
sacraments, through the Church which is the 'mystery' of Him
who was crucified and is risen, who restores us to life and brings
about in himself the transfiguration of the cosmos. The state of
'ecclesial being', to adopt the expression of a modern Greek theolo­
gian, was a fact of experience for the person in communion, for whom
humanity and the universe were of their very nature 'resurrectional'
and paschal. This understanding far transcends our endless debates
about the Church as an 'institution'.
This book first approaches the subject doctrinally, reflecting in the
mystery rather than on it, because we must not only love God, but
must love him, as the Gospel says, 'with all our mind'. Then we deal
with the path of ascesis, that 'spiritual combat, harder than the battles
of men', the objective of which, however, is to let go. Finally we come

Introduction

11

to contemplation, which i s expressed most clearly i n a capacity for
loving, with a love that is creative, because it is an activity shared
with the incarnate and crucified God. This book will also, we hope,
make it possible to j udge more precisely where Christianity stands in
relation to other world religions and to the various forms of atheism.
Indeed, as we consider the basic themes of the Three-in-One and
the Divine humanity, the universal and traditional experience of the
divine may come to appear no less clear and compelling than the
modern Western experience of the human.
The following pages therefore contain:
I. Texts, translated so as to appeal as directly as possible to
non-specialists. Slight transpositions or adaptations have been made
here and there the better to convey the spirit of the original.
2. An accompanying commentary which goes some way to com­
pensate for the necessarily fragmentary and disjointed selection of
texts, and which in itself forms a kind of essay.
3· Notes at the end of the book in alphabetical order of authors
quoted, referring to the works from which the texts have been taken.
These notes provide the indispensable historical element, describing
briefly the characters and lives of the writers, and helping us to
distinguish the ephemeral from the lasting, or, in the communion
of saints, from the eternal. Finally, I have added notes on Arianism,
Early Monasticism and Monophysitism.
Olivier Clement

ABBREVIATIONS

Bickell I
Bickell II
csco

G. Bickell, Ausgewiihlte Gedichte der Syrischen
Kirchenviiter, Kempten, I 872.
G. Bickell, Ausgewiihlte Schriften der Syrischen
Kirchenviiter, Kempten, I 87 4·
Corpus Scriptorum Christianorum Orientalium,

Louvain.
CSEL

Corpus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum Latinorum,

Lou vain.
GCS
Ichthys

Griechische Christliche Schriftsteller, Berlin.
Collection Ichthys, Litteratures Chretiennes, A.

Philokalia
PL
PG
PO

Philocalie des Peres neptiques, Astir, Athens.
Patrologia Latina, Migne.
Patrologia Grceca, Migne.
Patrologia Orienta/is, Paris.
Sources Chretiennes, Cerf, Paris.
Spiritualite Orientale, Bellefontaine Abbey.

Hamman, Paris, later Grasser, later Centurion.

sc
so

PART ONE

Understanding the
Mystery

1

Quest, Encounter, and
Decision