tears, mourning, the slavery that reduces us to a chattel, the cross,
the tomb, hell; not because of some masochistic desire for pain
(nothing could be more foreign to the Fathers' way of thinking)
but in each case to correct and heal our nature, to set free our
desires blocked by the multiplicity of needs, to overcome separation
and death, and through the cross to transform the brokenness of
creation into a spring of living water.
He took our flesh and our flesh became God, since it is united with
God and forms a single entity with him. For the higher perfection
dominated, resulting in my becoming God as fully as he became
man . . . Here below he is without a father; on high he is without
a mother: both these states belong to divinity . . . He was wrapped
in swaddling clothes, but when he rose from the tomb he laid aside
the shroud . . . 'He had no form or comeliness' (Isaiah 5 3 .2), but
on the mountain he shone with a splendour more dazzling than the
sun - the foretaste of his future glory.
As man he was baptized, but as God he washed away our
sins. He had no need of purification, but he wished to sanctify
the waters. As man he was tempted, but as God he triumphed,
and he exhorts us to be confident because he has 'overcome the
world' (John r 6.3 3 ). He was hungry, but he fed thousands and he
is 'the living bread which came down from heaven' (John 6.5 1 ).
He was thirsty, but he cried, 'If any one thirst, let him come to
me and drink,' and he promised that believers should become
springs of living water (John 7·37f.). He knew weariness, but
he is rest for 'all who labour and are heavy laden' (Matthew
r r .28). He prays, but he answers prayers. He weeps, but wipes
away tears. He asks where Lazarus has been laid, for he is man;
but he raises him to life, for he is God. He is sold, dirt cheap,
for thirty pieces of silver, but he redeems the world, at great
cost, with his own blood . . . He was weak and wounded, but
he cures all infirmity and all weakness. He was nailed to the
wood and lifted up, but he restores us by the tree of life . . .
He dies, but he brings to life, and by his own death destroys
death. He is buried, but he rises again. He descends into hell, but
rescues the souls imprisoned there.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Third Theological Oration,
5 3 ?-8)

1 9-20

(PG 3 6,

This is possible because whilst Jesus is united both morally and
ontologically with the whole human race ( being 'consubstantial' with

44

Understanding the Mysteries

us, a single being with us 'according to his humanity', in the words
of the Fourth Ecumenical Council), he nevertheless stays constantly
open to his Origin, the source of divinity, the Father who never ceases
to send down upon him the life-giving Spirit to act in him (for, as the
Council also said, Christ is 'consubstantial with the Father and the
Spirit according to his divinity') .
The Father was wholly i n the Son when he fulfilled by his incar­
nation the mystery of our salvation. Indeed, the Father was not
himself incarnate, but he was united to the incarnation of the Son.
And the Spirit was wholly in the Son, without indeed being incarnate
with him, but acting in complete unity with him in his mysterious
incarnation.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, 6o (PG 90,624)

So Christ's sacrifice was not in the least demanded by the Father,
as the only thing that could satisfy divine j ustice, appease the wrath
of God, and incline him favourably towards the human race. That
would be a regression to a non-biblical idea of sacrifice, as Rene
Girard has recently made clear. In the next quotation, Gregory
Nazianzen, opposing this way of thinking, meditates profoundly on
the readiness of Abraham to sacrifice his son.
Christ's sacrifice is a sacrifice of praise, of sanctification, of
restoration, by which he offers the whole of creation to the Father
so that the Father may bring it to life in the Holy Spirit. It is
truly a Pasch, the Passover, the 'passing over' of creation into the
Kingdom of Life. Because of the ontological unity of Christ with
the whole human race, j ust mentioned above, the sacrifice was a
bloody crucifixion. United with us in being and in love, Christ
took on himself all the hatred, rebellion, derision, despair - 'My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' - all the murders,
all the suicides, all the tortures, all the agonies of all humanity
throughout all time and all space. In all these Christ bled, suffered,
cried out in anguish and desolation. But, as he suffered in a human
way, so he was trustful in a human way: ' Father, into thy hands I
commit my spirit'. At that moment death is swallowed up in life,
the abyss of hatred is lost in the bottomless depths of love. 'A few
drops of blood' falling into the earth as into an immense chalice,
'have renewed the entire universe'.
Why was the blood that was shed for us, God's most precious and
glorious blood, this blood of the Sacrificer and of the Sacrifice,

The God-Man

45

why was it poured out, and to whom was it offered? . . . If it was a
ransom offered to the Father, the question arises, for what reason?
It was not the Father that held us captive. And then, why should
the blood of his only Son be pleasing to the Father who refused
to accept Isaac when Abraham offered him as a burnt offering,
accepting instead the sacrifice of a ram?
Is it not evident that the Father accepts the sacrifice, not
because he demands it or feels some need for it, but in order
to carry out his own plan? Humanity had to be brought to life
by the humanity of God . . . we had to be called back to him by
his Son . . . Let the rest be adored in silence.
It was necessary for us that God should take flesh and die so
that we might have new life . . .
Nothing can equal the miracle of my salvation; a few drops
of blood redeem the whole universe.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 45, For Easter, 22,28,29, (PG 3 6,
6 s 3 ,66r,664)