Human beings are mere scraps of life, here only for an instant. We
live a 'dead life', according to Gregory of Nyssa, in a world per­
meated by death, in which everything gravitates continually towards
nothingness. And this is the root of all our ill. For unlike the a nimals,
we know we are going to die.
But our very anguish is a source of grace, for it betrays a longing
for being and unity, a yearning to know the Being and the One. The
anguish and the grace are a constant theme of Augustine of Hippo,
the Western Church Father. We may find him somewhat schematic,
but his cry from the heart demands to be heard.
Brethren, do our years last? They slip away day by day. Those
which were, no longer are; those to come are not yet here. The
former are past, the latter will come, only to pass away in their
turn. Today exists only in the moment in which we speak. Its first
hours have passed, the remainder do not yet exist; they will come,
but only to fall into nothingness . . . Nothing contains constancy
in itself. The body does not possess being: it has no permanence.
It changes with age, it changes with time and place, it changes with
illness and accident. The stars have as little constancy; they change
in hidden ways, they go whirling through space . . . they are not
steady, they do not possess being.
Nor is the human heart any more constant. How many thoughts
disturb it, how many ambitions! How many pleasures draw it this
way and that, tearing it apart! The human spirit itself, although
endowed with reason, changes; it does not possess being. It wills
and does not will; it knows and does not know; it remembers
and forgets. No one has in himself the unity of being . . . After
so many sufferings, diseases, troubles and pains, let us return

16

Understanding the Mysteries

humbly to that One Being. Let us enter into that city whose
inhabitants share in Being itself.
AuGUSTINE

OF HIPPO

Commentary on Psalm

r2r,

6 (PL 3 6, 1 6 2 3 )

It is true that human beings have been eager 'to achieve unity
by themselves, to be their own masters and to depend only on
themselves' (ibid.). But that is an adventure like Lucifer's which
leaves us in pure nihilism. That is why metanoia, the great 'turning
round' of the mind and heart, and of our whole grasp of reality,
is the daughter of hope. It is the renunciation of despair.
joHN CuMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 5th step, 2
(Astir, Athens 1 970, p. 5 1 )

This i s a matter not of mere speculation, but of life o r death, of
life stronger than death:
for communion with God is life, and separation from God
death.
IRENiEUS

OF

IS

LYONS Against Heresies, V,27,2 (SC 1 5 3 , p. 3 42)

A life without eternity is unworthy of the name of life. Only eternal
life is true.
AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermon 346,1 (PL 3 8, 1 5 22)

That is still true, even though turning to God is generally con­
sidered madness these days, even more than it was in the Roman
Empire at the peak of its glory. There is a sort of sleep of the soul
and people hope to escape death by sleep-walking, or by losing
themselves in frantic activity.
Abbot Anthony says, 'A time is coming when people will go mad,
and when they meet someone who is not mad, they will turn to
him and say, "You are out of your mind," just because he is not
like them.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers Anthony, 25 (PG 65,84)

Anguish and despair are not the only starting point. There is
also our sense of wonder, and the riddle which we perceive in

Quest, Encounter, and Decision

17

the order and beauty of the world on the one hand, and all the
events of history on the other.
Through intelligent and beautiful forms of creation the invisible
gives structure and balance to the visible, but the means employed are
gravity, death, disintegration. Humanity likewise, consciously or not,
draws from the invisible not only the very idea of j ustice but also the
high demands of knowledge and art and the possibility of those laws
that set a limit to violence and protect friendship.
Who gave you the ability to contemplate the beauty of the skies,
the course of the sun, the round moon, the millions of stars, the
harmony and rhythm that issue from the world as from a lyre, the
return of the seasons, the alternation of the months, the demarcation
of day and night, the fruits of the earth, the vastness of the air, the
ceaseless motion of the waves, the sound of the wind? Who gave
you the rain, the soil to cultivate, food to eat, arts, houses, laws,
a republic, cultivated manners, friendship with your fellows?
GREGORY NAZIANZEN On love for the poor, 23 (PG 3 5 ,27 3 )

Through anguish and wonder humanity has some inkling o f the
great depth of divine wisdom. But no full understanding is possible;
only a holy fear, a trembling in the face of the immeasurable.
'Such knowledge is too wonderful for me' (Psalm 1 39.6). 'I praise
thee, for thou art fearful and wonderful' (ibid. v. 14) . . . There
are many things at whi('h we marvel without fear, for example the
beauty of architecture, the masterpieces of painting, or the glory
of the human form. We also marvel at the vastness and infinite
depth of the sea, but to be above that depth is also terrifying. In the
same way the sacred writer as he leaned out over the infinite abyss
of God's wisdom was seized with giddiness. Filled with wonder
he drew back trembling, and said, 'I praise thee, for thou art
fearful and wonderful. Wonderful are thy works. ' And again: 'Such
knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain it. '
joHN CHRYSOSTOM On the incomprehensibility of God,
70 5 )

I

(PG 48,

We can see the whole process displayed in the life o f a certain
Hilary of Poitiers, a fourth century Roman-French citizen remarkable
for his relevance to ourselves. The elite of the declining Roman

18

Understanding the Mysteries