is true that he had played with the Caliph when they were both
children.
Soon, however, a new Caliph embarked on the wholesale Islam­
ization of state officials. John, probably in disgrace, retired to the
monastery of St Sabas near Jerusalem, where he died at the age of
over a hundred after having written a considerable amount.
His basic work is the Source of Knowledge which includes, in its
first part, a remarkable semantic clarification inspired by Aristotle,
and culminates in its third part in an exposition of the orthodox
faith. On the Orthodox Faith is a sort of Summa composed from
the standpoint of a theology of celebration - John also translated it
into hymn form - rather than from the angle of scholastic theology.
John adds precision to the Trinitarian antinomy and to the mystery
of the hypostasis (the person) as the 'source of existence'. In this
ontology of the person and of participation, being always appears
as 'enhypostasy'. The Son 'enhypostasizes' the whole of humanity,
imparts glory to it and thereby unites himself to each of us in an
ineffable participation. In this regard the Damascene takes up again
the phrase of Maximus the Confessor: ' In his wholeness and entirety
he unites himself to me in my wholeness and entirety'.
In his Homily on the Transfiguration John emphasizes that
humanity is called to an integral deification by participation in the
transfigured Christ, whose 'earthly body radiates the divine splen­
dour.' This transfiguration expresses itself in sanctity, supremely in
that of the Mother of God - who becomes, for John, the model
of the contemplative - but it can already be experienced in the
celebration of the liturgy. The icon forms an integral part of the
liturgy and John wrote three treatises in its defence. The icon of
icons, that of Christ, finds its j ustification in the incarnation, which
causes the divine energies to radiate even from matter: 'I do not
venerate matter, but I venerate the Creator of matter who for my
sake became matter.' And while Christ assumed humanity whole
and entire, he is also an actual individual and therefore can be
represented. Here, as we have said, the thinking of Antioch meets
that of Alexandria.
Today the question arises whether the theology of icons, in so
far as it is the theology of the divine energies present in matter, could
not shed some light on culture in a Christian sense.
On the Orthodox Faith PG 94,784 - 1 228; Homily on the Trans­
figuration PG 96,545 - 576; On the Virtues and Vices PG 9 5 ,8 5-97;
The Eight Spirits of Evil PG 9 5 ,So - 84

356

Biographical Notes

jOHN OF 5CYTHOPOLIS (c.47 5 - C. 5 5 0)

John of Scythopolis (Beisan, in Galilee) was one of the theologians
who at the beginning of the sixth century defended the dogma
of Chalcedon and interpreted it in accordance with the 'energetic'
Christology of Cyril of Alexandria. He posits a real transfigura­
tion of humanity in Christ through the energies of the divinity.
About 5 3 2 John wrote a commentary on the works of the Pseudo­
Dionysius, scholia, which for a long time were ascribed to Maximus
the Confessor. They bring Dionysian theology into the mainstream
of Tradition.
On the Divine Names of Dionysius PG 4,14-576
jUSTIN (died C. 1 6 5 )

Justin i s the most important o f the apologists o f the second century.
He was born in Palestine, at Flavia Neapolis, the ancient Sychem,
not far from Jacob's Well where Jesus told the Samaritan woman
about worshipping 'in spirit and in truth'. He belonged to a family
of well-to-do farmers, no doubt Latin in origin, though he himself
wrote in Greek.
This upright man, a transparent and ardent soul, embarked on
the quest of the true 'philosophy', a word that in the second century
denoted an art of living, a wisdom, an approach to the Absolute. He
travelled, investigated, progressed from Stoicism to the disciples of
Aristotle, of Pythagoras, of Plato, until the day when a mysterious
old man whom he met on the sea-shore drew" his attention to the
'prophets'. The Bible led him to Christ. He was baptized, at Ephesus
for certain. From now on he in his turn could wear the pallium, the
philosopher's cloak, but in order to teach what in his eyes constituted
'the philosophy' par excellence, Christianity. So he founded a school
of Christian wisdom at Rome. A Cynic philosopher, jealous of his
success and publicly convicted by him of ignorance, denounced him
to the imperial police. (Christians were not sought out, but if they
were reported they were sentenced.) Justin was executed, probably
in r 6 5 , with six of his pupils. We have two Apologies from him
addressed to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, and the Dialogue with
Trypho, the account of a debate with a learned rabbi at Ephesus.
Justin emphasizes the universal presence of the Logos, the bridge
between the ineffable God and the world. The Logos manifests

Biographical Notes

357

himself in pagan wisdom and more overtly in the Bible, where Justin
excels in discovering 'types' and 'images' of Christ. But this ger­
mination of the Logos in all humanity, that is completed in the
incarnation, is continually being thwarted by the powers of dark­
ness, transforming prefigurations into idolatry and then persecuting
Christians. However, it is the vision of the divine-human convergence
that prevails.
Justin also presents a predominantly unitary conception of hu­
manity. The soul is inseparable from the body, because the image of
God makes them a unique unity.
Apologies PG 6; Dialogue with Trypho PG 6; English Translation in
the Ante-Nicene Christian Library, vol II, r 8 6 7

MACARIUS THE EGYPTIAN or O F S cETE or T H E G R EAT (c. 3 oo ­
c.390)

One of the spiritual masters of the Egyptian desert in the fourth cen­
tury, the organizer of the monastic life at Scete, a disciple of Anthony
and teacher of Evagrius. They gave him the nickname of 'child-elder'
perhaps on account of the extraordinary gift of discernment that he
had manifested from a very early age.
His prestige caused some Spiritual Homilies to be ascribed to
him that are in fact of later date and of a different origin. The Coptic
cycle of Sayings concerning him reproduces for the most part the
Greek alphabetical collection, but also contains some surprising
texts, the oldest known if authentic, on invocation of the Name of
Jesus combined with the breathing.
Coptic Apophthegms, in Histoire des Monasteres de basse Egypte,

(Paris 1 89 4 )

MACARIUS (PSEUDO-MACARIUS) (c. 400)

This is the real but unknown author of the Spiritual Homilies and
the Great Letter long ascribed to Macarius the Egyptian. He prob­
ably lived in Mesopotamia, moving to Asia Minor during the last
third of the fourth century. He is not in the least a 'Messalian', as

358

Biographical Notes