Christ the world is joined together again in symbol, i n a profusion of
symbols. The invisible part appears i n the visible: the visible draws
its meaning from the invisible. Each symbolizes the other in the
'house of the world', of which God is the 'eccentric centre', being
radically transcendent. God transcends the intelligible as well as the
visible, but through the incarnation of the Logos he penetrates them
both, transfigures and unites them. The world is a vast incarnation
which the fall of the human race tries to contradict. The diabolos,
the opposite of the symbolon, is continually trying to keep apart the
separated halves of the ring; but they come together in Christ. Chris­
tian symbolism expresses nothing less than the union in Christ of the
divine and the human - of which the cosmos becomes the dialogue
- displaying the circulation in Christ of glory between 'earth' and
'heaven', between the visible and the invisible.
God's love for humanity wraps the spiritual in the perceptible,
the superessential in the essence. It gives form . . . to what is
formless and, through a variety of symbols, it multiplies and shapes
Simplicity that has no shape.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, I,

4

(PG 3 , 5 9 2 )

The world is one . . . for the spiritual world in its totality is
manifested in the totality of the perceptible world, mystically ex­
pressed in symbolic pictures for those who have eyes to see. And
the perceptible world in its entirety is secretly fathomable by the
spiritual world in its entirety, when it has been simplified and
amalgamated by means of the spiritual realities. The former is
embodied in the latter through the realities; the latter in the former
through the symbols. The operation of the two is one.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Mystagogia, 2 (PG 9 1 ,669)

The divine apostle says: 'Ever since the creation of the world his
invisible nature . . . has been clearly perceived in the things that
have been made' (Romans 1 .20). If the invisible things are seen by
means of the visible, the visible things are perceived in a far greater
measure through the invisible by those who devote themselves to
contemplation. For the symbolic contemplation of spiritual things
by means of the visible is nothing other than the understanding in
the Spirit of visible things by means of the invisible.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Mystagogia, 2 (PG 9 1 ,669)

220

Approaches to Contemplation

God himself is simple and unlimited, beyond all created things . . .
because he is free of any interdependence.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 1 , 1 296)

So everything is symbolic: all creatures, however lowly, and
their relationships, their balance, in which life springs unceasingly
from death. The purity of matter, that point of transparency at the
heart of things, reaches its perfection in Mary's fruitful virginity.
Alongside the utilitarian use of objects, or rather by means of it,
one must learn to contemplate the flowering of heavenly realities in
them. There is not only the horizontal concatenation of cause and
effect. Each created object when contemplated 'vertically' expands
to infinite horizons. Only this 'vertical' knowledge can clarify the
scientific quest and limit and guide its technical power. Homo faber
(Man the Maker) suffocates himself and suffocates the world if he
is not in the first place homo celebrans ( Man the Worshipper) .
The apostle Paul teaches us that God's 'invisible nature' has been
'clearly perceived .in the things that have been made' (Romans 1 .20):
what is not seen perceived in what is seen. He shows us that this
visible world contains teaching about the invisible world, and that
this earth includes certain 'images of celestial realities' . . . It could
even be that God who made the human race 'in his own image and
likeness' (Genesis 1.27) also gave to other creatures a likeness to
certain celestial realities. Perhaps this resemblance is so detailed that
even the grain of mustard seed, 'the smallest of all seeds' (Matthew
1 3 .3 1 ), has its counterpart in the kingdom of heaven. If so, by
that law of its nature that makes it the smallest of seeds and yet
capable of becoming larger than · all the others and of sheltering
in its branches the birds of the air, it would represent for us not a
particular celestial reality but the kingdom of heaven as a whole.
In this sense it is possible that other seeds of the earth likewise
contain an analogy with cdestial objects and are a sign of them.
And if that is true for seeds it must be the same for plants. And if
it is true of plants it cannot be otherwise for animals, birds, reptiles
and four-footed beasts . . . It may be granted that these creatures,
seeds, plants, roots and animals, are undoubtedly at the service
of humanity's physical needs. However, they include the shape
and image of the invisible world, and they also have the task of
elevating the soul and guiding it to the contemplation of celestial
objects. Perhaps that is what the spokesman of the Divine Wisdom
means when he expresses himself in the words: 'It is he who gave

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

221

me unerring knowledge of what exists, to know the structure of the
world and the activity of the elements: the beginning and end and
middle of times, the alternations of the solstices and the changes
of the seasons, the cycles of the year and the constellations of the
stars, the natures of animals and the tempers of wild beasts, the
powers of spirits and the reasonings of men, the varieties of plants
and the virtues of roots; I learned both what is secret and what is
manifest' (Wisdom 7·17- 21) . He shows thus, without any possible
doubt, that everything that is seen is related to something hidden.
'
That is to say that each visible reality is a symbol, and refers to
an invisible reality to which it is related.
0RIGEN Commentary on the Song of Songs, 3 (GCS 8,208-9)

For anyone who reflects, the appearances of beauty become the
themes of an invisible harmony. Perfumes as they strike our senses
represent spiritual illumination. Material lights point to that im­
material light of which they are the images.
D IONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Celestial Hierarchy, 1,3 (PG 3 , 1 2 1 )

The interpretation o f the world a s a theophany, that grand
contribution of the ancient religions to understanding, thus finds
its full place in Christianity. But it has been freed from the danger
of idolatry and has become the poetical expression of a communion.
The marvellous hymn composed by Dionysius the Areopagite should
be read: the brilliance of the sun symbolizes and incarnates the life­
giving radiation of the divine glory. The sun by its prolific splendour
testifies to a different Sun. The Good-and-Beautiful, spreading its
presence like the sun, initiates a Trinitarian game of separation and
conj unction; it gives each object its limits and at the same time its
urge towards communion, its leap in the light towards the fount
of the sunshine, towards the centre where the lines converge. This
quotation from the Areopagite reminds one of Van Gogh writing
from Aries, at the height of August, to his brother Theo: 'Anyone
here who does not believe in the sun is a complete infidel'.
What praise is not demanded by the blaze of the sun? For it is from
the Good that its light comes, and it is itself the image of the Good.
Thus we give glory to the Good by calling it Light . . . Indeed, j ust
as the goodness proper to the deity permeates everything that exists,
. . . so that it illumines every creature and gives it life, . . . and is
its height and breadth, its cause and its purpose; so likewise with
the image in which divine Goodness is revealed, that great sun

222

Approaches to Contemplation