Contemplation begins only after the completion of ascetical exercises
(praxis), the aim of which is the achievement of interior freedom
(apatheia), that is to say, the possibility of loving. Contemplation
consists of two stages: direct communion with God is the aim, of
course, but first we must come to 'knowledge of creatures' or 'con­
templation of nature' (physike theoria), that is, the contemplation
'of the secrets of the glory of God hidden in his creatures'.
Faith is the doorway to the mysteries. What the eyes of the body
are for physical objects, faith is for the hidden eyes of the soul. Just
as we have two bodily eyes, so we have two spiritual eyes, and each
has its own way of seeing. With one we see the glory of God hidden
in creatures: with the other we contemplate the glory of God's holy
nature when he deigns to give us access to the mysteries.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 72 (p. 28 1 )

People who know nothing o f God - and there are plenty o f them
in our time - none the less have an inkling of him through the things
he has created, when they look at them, apart from their practical
uses, in their sheer beauty and their strange gratuitousness. Then
they are filled with wonder. For the real miracle, as Wittgenstein
said, is that things exist! The cosmos - a word that for the ancient
Greeks meant at the same time order and ornament - by the continual
process of death changing into life and decay into growth, bears
witness specifically to an intelligence at work, which, in a time of
apparently continuous scientific advance, our intelligence is able to
decipher. ' Ever since the world began, his invisible attributes, that
is to say his everlasting power and deity, have been visible to the
eye of reason in the things he has made' ( Romans r . 2o ) . As Dumitru

21 4

Approaches to Contemplation

Staniloae emphasizes in his Dogmatic Theology (Bucharest 1 9 7 8 )
the very rationality o f the world would b e inexplicable without a n
eternal Subject. I t 'presupposes the rational, the more than rational,
the apophatic depth of an eternal Person, and has meaning only if
it is addressed by that eternal Person to persons with rational and
more than rational powers, so as to bring about an agreement and
a communion of love with them'.
All things would tend to nothing in virtue of their nature if they
were not governed by God.
GREGORY THE GREAT Commentary on the Book of Job, 1 6,3 7 , 4 5
(PL 7 5 , 1 1 44)

For the Fathers there is a question here not so much of natural
theology as of an original revelation, a covenant with the Logos 'through
whom all things were created' (Colossians 1 . 1 6), a covenant that has
been renewed and wonderfully deepened by the incarnation of the
Logos. Evagrius makes it clear that the Wisdom and the Power of God,
of which St Paul goes on to speak, are the Son and the Spirit. Making
sense of the universe is only possible with the Trinity. For the purpose
of the universe is revealed by the Logos, and it is the Spirit, the life-giving
breath, who is causing each thing and the universe as a whole to tend in
the direction of that purpose. The world, for a Christian, is a Trinitarian
text, or better it is a woven cloth: the fixed threads of the warp symbolize
the Logos, the moving threads of the woof the dynamism of the Pneuma.
Besides this, the cosmos, as we have seen, has been mysteri­
ously preserved and strengthened by the cross. In Christ it has been
drawn into a 'union without absorption' with God (Dionysius the
Areopagite) . The first Christians who did not dare to make direct
representations of the cross, because it was an object of disgust and
opprobrium, used to see it in all manner of things - in the flight of
a bird, in the spread of a tree's branches, in the shape of a mast with
its sail, in the complete human figure. Today we are discovering that
the cross is written into the very stuff of matter, as is shown by
contemporary physics which can only tackle its subject by mult­
iplying antinomies. The rhythm of death-and-resurrection recurs in
the whole evolution of the cosmos. It transmutes horror into a kind of
sacrifice and finds its completion in the ultimate mutation of Easter.
All the life and all the suffering of the world are taken up into it. This
vision of the 'Sacrifice of Love' ought to permeate the way we look at
creatures and objects every day. 'You are looking at the sun? Then
think of Him who is the Light of the World, albeit shrouded in

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

215

darkness. You are looking at the trees and their branches growing
green again each spring? Then think of Him who, hanging on the
wood of the cross, draws everything to himself. You are looking at
rocks and stones? Then think of the stone in the garden that was
blocking the entrance to a tomb. That stone was rolled away and since
then the door of the sepulchre has never been shut' (A Monk of the
Eastern Church, Love without Limits, Chevetogne 1 9 7 1 pp.27-28 ) .
As for those who are far from God . . . God has made i t possible for
them to come near to the knowledge of him and his love for them
through the medium of creatures. These he has produced, as the
letters of the alphabet, so to speak, by his power and his wisdom,
that is to say, by his Son and by his Spirit . . .
The whole of this ministry is performed by creatures for the
benefit of those who are far from God.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Letter to Melania (in Hausherr, p. 84)

The contemplative, like the illiterate person, does without books.
Creatures and things in their delicacy and infinite subtlety continually
speak to him of God. 'All are yours; and you a re Christ's; and Christ
is God's' (I Corinthians 3 .22). This could be put the other way round:
'God is Christ's; and Christ is yours; and you belong to all things.'
One of the wise men of that time went to find the holy man
Anthony and asked him, ' Father, how can you be happy when you
are deprived of the consolation that books can give?'
Anthony replied, 'My philosopher friend, my book is the
nature of creatures; and this book is always in front of me when
I want to read the words of God.'
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Practicus or The Monk (SC

171,

p. 694)

The world is the gift of God. We must know how to perceive
the giver through the gift. More precisely, since the time of the
incarnation, the Passion and Easter, we can see the earth as an
immense memorial, the tomb/womb in which Christ was buried
and to which he gave resurrected power through the power of his
own resurrection. And the tree of the cross, which has become the
tree of life, secretly identifies the earth with paradise and gives proof
once again of the sacramental nature of things.
I cannot show you my God, but I can show you his works.
'Everything was made by him' (John I . J ) . He created the world

216

Approaches to Contemplation

in its newness, he who has no beginning. He who is eternal created
time. He who is unmoved made movement. Look at his works and
praise their maker.
AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermon 261, 2 (PL 3 8, I 203 )