The Eucharist, which is the basis of the Church, necessarily had,
for the Christians of the first centuries, a character of unanimity
and community. Not in the sense of an anonymous 'mass meeting',
because at the same time it was completely personal, often with the
priest using the formula 'the servant of God N. communicates'. It
was precisely this that established the person in communion; that
made of the individual a distinct being but in communion, after
the image of the Trinity. In the symbolism of the week, which is
more primitive than that of the year, every Sunday is Easter and is
therefore the eucharistic day par excellence, on which all the faithful
exchange the kiss of peace and form themselves into the Church by
sharing together in the eucharistic feast. Christ rose on the day after
the sabbath, on the 'first day of the week', as the New Testament calls
it. The first day is also the eighth - and the last - day. ' Day One', when
time began, as Basil of Ca::s area says, (Treatise on the Holy Spirit, 27)
is the original day of creation, the Easter dawning of the 'day with no
sunset' on which we welcome Life sprung from the tomb.
We all assemble on the day of the sun [Sunday] because that is
the first day, the day on which God drew matter out of dark足
ness and created the world. It is also the day on which Christ
our Saviour rose from the dead.
jusTIN Apology, 1,67 (PG 6,84)

According to some of the Fathers, Clement of Alexandria in
particular, this first and last Day, which makes Christians 'sons of
the Day' ( r Thessalonians 5 . 5 ) , also symbolizes the eternal birth
of the Word 'through whom every creature has come to the light
of existence' (Miscellanies 6,r 6). For the Word is that ' beginning'

1 22

Initiation for Warfare

(Genesis I . I ) and the Word incarnate is that 'new beginning' in
which God creates and re-creates 'the heavens and the earth'. The
resurrection resumes the work of creation, in order to associate us
with the coming of the eighth day, and make us sons of the Son.
All the same, more frequent communion, often daily, is also well
attested in the apostolic and patristic ages, with the idea that every
day ought to be a festival and share in the grace of the 'Day of the
Lord', a biblical expression denoting the coming of the Kingdom.
The bread asked for in the Lord's Prayer in daily anticipation of the
last Today (this bread called in the gospel epiousios, that is, 'bread
of the world to come', a 'supersubstantial' bread), is very clearly
the Eucharist. There is no question of 'deserving' the Eucharist, as
we shall see clearly in the texts that will be quoted on faithfulness
and humility. 'Anyone who is considered unworthy to receive the
Eucharist every day will be no less unworthy to receive it once a year,'
St Ambrose of Milan said. It is a question of becoming aware of one's
unworthiness, of taking one's place amongst those 'sick persons' for
whom Jesus said he came, and who need for their survival the 'bread
of life', the 'daily bread', the 'medicine of immortality'. There were
some, ascetics in the desert, who could receive the Eucharist once
only, at the end of their life. But they received it then with the
radiance of a divine flash of lightning. The Christian people, however,
were not ascetics, but lived under the influence of the Eucharist,
sustained by the life of the Other. They had no fear of 'trivializing'
holy communion because they knew that the mystery of Christianity,
the paradox of it, is precisely the coming of God in the seem足
ing triviality of our daily life.
On this fundamental point there is no difference between the
Latin and the Greek Fathers. St Ambrose speaks of daily communion
with a view to giving every day the spiritual flavour of the Today of
the Kingdom.
You hear it said that every time the sacrifice is offered, the Lord's
death, resurrection and ascension are represented, the forgive足
ness of sins is offered, and yet do you not receive this bread
of life every day? Anyone who is wounded looks for healing.
For us it is a wound to be liable to sin. Our healing lies in the
adorable heavenly sacrament . . .
If you receive it every day, every day becomes for you Today.
If Christ is yours today, he rises for you today. Today has
come.
AMBROSE OF MILAN The Sacraments, V,2-26 (SC 25, pp. 9 s-96)

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

123

St Basil speaks no differently. And his letter shows that in the
fourth century, in a period that was already 'Constantinian', when
mass coversions were taking place, the ancient custom still existed
(attested by the Fathers and in the first place by the Didache) whereby
on Sunday people were allowed to take away consecrated bread and
wine to keep at home, so that each could communicate every day or
the father could give communion to his family.
To communicate also every day, to receive one's share of the sacred
body and precious blood of Christ is an excellent and beneficial
practice, because the Lord himself says clearly, 'He who eats my
flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life'. Who, in fact, could
doubt that to partake continually of life is to live fully? We on
our part communicate four times a week, on Sunday, Wednesday,
Friday and Saturday; but also on other days if the memorial of a
saint is being kept. As for the need to take communion with our
own hands, to which we may be reduced in time of persecution,
if there is no priest or deacon, it is superfluous to show that this
is in no way against the rule, since the practice is confirmed by
immemorial usage attested by history . . . At Alexandria and all
over Egypt each believer may keep the Eucharist at his home and
give it to himself when he wishes. As soon in fact as the priest
has offered the sacrifice and distributed the sacrament, anyone
who has once received the whole is right to believe that when
he takes part of it each day he is continuing to partake of the
sacrifice and is receiving it from the hands of the priest who gave
it to him. In church indeed the priest gives the amount for which
he is asked. The person who receives it is free to keep it and put
it to his mouth with his own hand.
BASI L OF CJESAREA Letter 93 (PG 3 2, 1 8 6-?)

It seems that in the sixth and seventh centuries, with the bar足
barian invasions and the disappearance or attenuation of the cultured
laity, people partly lost their sense of the life of the Church, and
communion, in both East and West, became an exceptional event,
from once to three times a year. The eucharistic celebration was
transformed into a sacred spectacle performed in the presence of an
'ignorant' people by clergy who effectively reserved the communion
for themselves. The Eucharist was thoroughly 'sacralized', in a setting
of reverence and fear, and approach to it became an individual
matter, no longer communal.

124

Initiation for Warfare