more transcendent than the 'One' of Plotinus, with whom humanity
identifies itself, and he is more within than the Self, whom Eastern
mysticism identifies as the Absolute. Augustine's ecstasy at Ostia,
a year after his conversion to Christ, bears witness, in a language
that is still that of Plotinus, to an aspiration towards the God who
is inaccessible and yet quite suddenly perceptible to the heart with an
overwhelming immediacy. This God, who is touched for an instant
'for a whole heartbeat', is then simultaneously glimpsed as an 'abyss
of inward joy' and as the Other, as my Creator, in whose presence I
am and who is speaking to me. Whereas a fleeting, purely Plotinian
experience a year earlier at Milan ended like withdrawal from drugs,
in 'an immense confusion', the ecstasy at Ostia takes place in the
great longsuffering of faith and fertilizes it with hope. On the other
hand, it must be emphasized, it is not solitary. The presence of his
mother suggests ecclesial communion.
Shortly before the day on which thy servant [Monica, Augustine's
mother] was to leave this world . . . it so happened that she and I
were alone, standing by a window from which could be seen the
garden of the house in which we were living at Ostia . . . Our
conversation was a very happy one. We dismissed the past and
took ourselves with all that we were into the future ahead of us.
We sought in the light of that eternal present that is thyself, Lord,
what the immortal life of the saints might be, that life that eye has
not seen nor ear heard nor heart grasped. We opened our hearts
wide to drink the waters of thy heavenly spring, that spring of life
that is in thee, so that by filling ourselves as best we could we might
have some inkling of that higher life . . .
We were exalted by an ever more burning desire and we
ascended through the whole range of physical creation right up
to the sky, whence the sun the moon and the stars send their
light upon the earth. Then we rose higher still, thinking inwardly
of thee, speaking of thee and marvelling at thy works. Thus we
arrived at our souls, and went on beyond them to reach that
region of inexhaustible plenty . . . where life is that very Wis足
dom by which was made everything that is and everything that
has been and everything that will be. But that Wisdom itself
was not made, for it is today such as it has been and such as
it will be - more precisely such as it is, for it is eternal . . .
And while we were speaking and desiring intensely to attain to
this sovereign Wisdom we touched it slightly for a whole heart足
beat.

Enstasy - Ecstasy

233

Then, with a sigh, we left in heaven those first fruits of
our spirit and came back to the word that is uttered and that
has a beginning and an end . . .
We said therefore: Suppose someone imposed silence within
himself upon the tumults of the flesh and shut his eyes to the
spectacle of earth, sea and sky; suppose he imposed silence on
his own soul without allowing it to stop at itself or think about
itself; suppose he rid himself of the dreams and the imaginings of
memory and forgot all language, all words, all that is mutable (for
if he listened to those things they would tell him, 'We did not make
ourselves: he who abides for ever made us.'); suppose he paid no
more heed to these creatures after they had invited him to listen
to their Creator, and God alone had spoken to him and he had
heard divine words not uttered by a tongue of flesh nor by the
voice of an angel, nor by a peal of thunder, nor by the language
of figures and symbols, but by the Creator himself, whom we love
in his creation, speaking in a wholly spiritual fashion, as in the
wholly spiritual contact that was effected just now between our
thought when it was ravished to heaven and the eternal Wisdom
. . . if then that ecstasy continued . . . and if the one who was
enjoying it were absorbed by that contemplation alone in the abyss
of interior joy, in such a way that eternal life resembled that brief
moment of transport after which we have sighed so longingly surely this would be the fulfilment of that word of the Gospel:
'Enter into the joy of your Lord'.
AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Confessions, IX,X 23-5 (Belles Lettres
p. 227-9)

The specifically Christian treatment of the theme is developed
by Augustine in his commentary on Psalm 4 1 . There again is the
worship of the personal God beyond self, beyond the Self, beyond
the fine point of the soul. But the path to him is more explicitly
described: it is the Church, whose liturgy, interiorized, enables the
soul to hear ( rather than to see, though the distinction is p urely
relative for mystics and artists) some fragments of the celestial lit足
urgy. How bewitching is the attraction of that divine music, that
sharing in the eternal festival ! Then suddenly through the music
- the transition from hearing to seeing - there blazes forth the
face of God, the face of Christ.
Note the realism of Augustine, his candour, free of the conven足
tional style preferred by the Christian Orient. The soul, after having
glimpsed the full reality, though only in a flash, falls back into the

23 4

Approaches to Contemplation