Christ, to swallow up death. It is to anticipate the manifest coming
of the Kingdom by disclosing its secret presence. To anticipate, and
therefore to prepare and to hasten.
Christ, having completed for us his saving work and ascended to
heaven with the body which he had taken to himself, accomplishes
in his own self the union of heaven and earth, of material and
spiritual beings, and thus demonstrates the unity of creation in the
polarity of its parts.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Commentary on the Lord's Prayer
(PG 90,877)

Christ in his love unites created reality with uncreated reality
- How wonderful is God's loving-kindness towards us! - and he
shows that through grace the two are become one. The whole
world enters wholly into the whole of God and by becoming
all that God is, except in identity of nature, it receives in place
of itself the whole God.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 I , I J 08-9)

Henceforward the world is breached by an enclave of non-death.
From now on we can enter into the resurrection, mark it with our own
character according to our lives, and proceed by means of Christ's
humanity to his divinity. For in Christ we have everything: he is 'the
Way, the Truth and the Life'.
'The Word became flesh and dwelt among us' (John 1 . 14). By
means of Christ who is man you proceed to Christ who is God.
God is indeed beyond us. But he has become man. What was far
from us has become, by the mediation of a man, very near. He is the
God in whom you shall dwell. He is the man by way of whom you
must reach him. Christ is at once the way you must follow and the
goal you must reach. He is the Word who became flesh and dwelt
among us. He put on what he was not, without losing what he
was. In him humanity was revealed and God was hidden. Humanity
was murdered, and God despised. But God disclosed himself and
humanity rose again . . . Christ is himself both man and God . . .
The whole of the Law depends on these commandments: 'You shall
love the Lord your God with all your heart, and with all your soul,
and with all your mind' and 'You shall love your neighbour as your­
self. On these two commandments depend all the law and the

56

Understanding the Mysteries

prophets' (Matthew 22.37-39). But in Christ you have everything.
Do you wish to love your God? You have him in Christ . . . Do
you wish to love your neighbour? You have him in Christ.
AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermons, 261,6 (PL 3 8, 1 2o6)

In Christ we have everything . . .
If you want to heal your wound, he is the doctor.
If you are burning with fever, he is the fountain.
If you are in need of help, he is strength.
If you are in dread of death, he is life.
If you are fleeing the darkness, he is light.
If you are hungry, he is food: '0 taste and see that the Lord is
good !
Happy are they who take refuge in him' (Psalm 34.8).
AMBROSE OF MILAN On Virginity, 1 6,99 (PL 1 6,305)

We are called to travel this way in the Holy Spirit. For Christ's
humanity is the scene of an unending Pentecost. In Christ, we can
receive the Spirit fully, drink the 'living water', the 'water welling up
to eternal life'.
The Word made himself 'bearer of the flesh' in order that human
beings might become 'bearers of the Spirit'.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA On the Incarnation and Against the
Arians, 8 (PG 26,996)

A stream has welled up, it has become a torrent . . .
It has flooded the universe, it has converged on the temple.
No bank or dam could halt it . . .
It has spread over the whole face of the earth and replenished it
completely.
All who were thirsty have drunk of it and their thirst has been
quenched,
For the Most High has given them to drink.
By means of the living water they live for ever. Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, 6 (Harris-Mingana, pp. 232-3 )
The Holy Spirit is inseparable from our freedom. God remains
in history the beggar who waits at each person's gate with infinite
patience, begging for love. His silence, with which we sometimes
reproach him, only shows his consideration for us. The cross and

The God-Man

57

the resurrection coexist. 'Christ will be in agony to the very end
of the world', he will suffer, according to Origen, until all human­
ity has entered the Kingdom.
God has made himself a beggar by reason of his concern for us
. . . suffering mystically through his tenderness to the end of time
according to the measure of each one's suffering.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Mystagogia, 24 (PG 9 1 ,7 1 3 )

'As for me, I a m poor and in misery' (Psalm 70.6). It is Christ
who utters these words, Christ who freely made himself poor for
love of humanity, to make us rich.
0RIGEN Commentary on the Psalms, Fragment 69, 5-6 (Pitra,
Analecta Sacra 3 , 8 8 )

By that very fact Christ ensures our freedom. In the desert he
rejected the temptations of riches, magic, and power that would have
drawn people after him like tamed animals. He did not come down
from the cross. He rose from the dead in secret, and is recognized only
by those who love him. In the Holy Spirit, he walks at everyone's side,
but he waits for the response of loving faith, that Yes like Mary's, by
which our freedom is set free.
The apostles gave a new testament of freedom to those who through
the Holy Spirit had received a new faith in God.
IRENIEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III, 1 2, 1 4 (SC 2 I I , p. 244)

In his great love God was unwilling to restrict our freedom,
even though he had the power to do so. He has left us to come
to him by the love of our heart alone.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 8 1 (Spanos, Athens 1 8 9 5 , p.
3 07)

4

God: Unity and Difference

The kenosis of the Son reveals the mystery of God who is Love. This
gift of life is an extension of a mysterious exchange at the heart of
the Deity. In God himself the One does not exclude the Other, it
includes it. The Unity of God is so complete, so rich, that it is not
solitude enclosed in itself, but rather the fullness of communion. And
thereby, the source of all communion.
Christ reveals the Father, from whom he comes, whose Son
and Word he is, and he breathes the mighty breathing of the Holy
Spirit.
I believe that if he is given the name 'Son', it is because he is
of the same essence as the Father and also because he comes
from the Father . . . He is called Logos (Word ) because he is,
in relation to the Father, what the word is to the mind . . . The
Son makes known the nature of the Father quickly and easily,
because everything begotten is an unspoken definition of the one
who begot it. If, on the other hand, we wish to call him 'Word'
because he is in everything, we shall not be mistaken: did not
the Word create all that is? . . . He is called 'Life' . . . because
he gives life to everything. Indeed, 'in him we live and move
and have our being' (Acts 17.28)
It is from him that we
all receive the breath of life and the Holy Spirit, whom our soul
contains to the limit of its openness.
•

•

•

GREGORY NAZIANZEN Fourth Theological Oration,
65 3 -4)

20-1

(PG 3 6,

The very name of Christ is a Trinitarian name: Christos, Messiah,
means 'anointed' with the Messianic unction. Now the Father is the
one who from all eternity 'anoints' the Son by causing the Spirit to

God: Unity and Difference

59