' In my Father's house,' says jesus, 'are many rooms' ( John 1 4.2).
St Paul emphasizes the complexity of the gifts of the Spirit, that should
be understood as so many compelling and distinct personal vocations.
(The Old Testament knows of the spiritual gift of a king, of a wise
man, of a scholar, an artist or a craftsman.) It is good, in the texts
which follow, that these legitimate differences should have been
recalled by some great monks, at a time when monasticism tended
to consider itself as the only Christian way. Those first monks lived in
humility in anticipation of the Kingdom at the heart of the Church.
In these texts Elijah symbolizes solitary contemplation, Abraham
a broad, noble, hospitable humanity, David a poetic talent and a
humble and firm exercise of power. Or again, some people radiate
interior peace; others, even living apart from society because of
disease, make themselves transparent to the divine light; others again
serve their fellows in all domains of culture and society. All these ways
meet in one and the same love for God and for one's neighbour. For
it is impossible to serve one's neighbour unselfishly unless one is a
person of prayer, unless one discerns through prayer the image of God
in one's neighbour. Nor can one go deep into contemplation without
interceding for all human beings and making oneself their servant.
A brother asked one of the elders, 'What good can I do to have
eternal life?' He answered, 'Only God knows what is good. How­
ever, I have heard it said that when someone put this question
to Abba Nistheros the Great, who was a friend of St Anthony,
he replied, "Not all good works are alike. For Scripture relates
that Abraham practised hospitality and God was with him; that
Elijah loved to pray on his own and God was with him; that
David was humble and God was with him. Therefore do all that
your soul longs to accomplish in accordance with the will of God
and your soul will be saved."'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Nistheros,

2

(PG 6 s , J os-?)

290

Approaches to Contemplation

Abba Poimen said, 'If three people meet and one of them is
keeping inner peace, the second is giving thanks to God in sickness,
the third is serving others from an unselfish motive, those three
are performing the same work.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Poimen, 29 (PG 65,3 29 )
In the very beautiful poem which follows, Gregory Nazianzen
celebrates human love and shows how the ennobling of eros makes
possible all the positive developments of civilized life. Marriage, far
from alienating the married from God, is the sacrament of his love.
The making of eros into a sacrament is achieved in the Church. The
fellowship of the Trinity which Christ imparts to humanity from then
on upholds, sustains and renews the relationship of man and wife.
But 'virginity', or rather monastic celibacy, is j ust as indis­
pensable. It alone can bear radical witness to the transcendence of
the person who is seeking God. Only this monastic witness proves
that marriage is not merely a regular and necessary function of
the species but the meeting of two persons. It alone can mark the
boundaries of social and political life and enable the conscience to
be free, beyond all conditioning. The monk is a happy Antigone,
an Antigone who dies only to rise again.
By fulfilling this law and the union of love
we help one another, and though born of the earth
we are following the law of the earth that is also God's law.
See then what profit wise marriage brings to the human race.
Who has taught wisdom? . . .
Who has explored all there is on earth, in the sea, under the
heavens?
Who then gave laws to cities and, before laws,
who filled the market place, the houses, the wrestling schools . . .
the tables for feasts?
Who gathered together the choirs that sing in the temples?
Who subdued the ferocity of wild life, cultivated the earth,
crossed the seas, and joined in one what was separate,
unless it was marriage? But here is something better still . . .
We are each other's hand, ear and foot
through the blessing of marriage which doubles our strength and
gladdens our friends . . .
Anxiety shared sweetens our trials,
joys are the sweeter for being in common.
Marriage is the seal of an affection that nothing can break . . .
·

The Difficult Love

291

Those who are joined in the flesh form a single soul
and, by their mutual love, together they sharpen the spur of their
faith,
for marriage does not distance them from God,
rather it draws them all the nearer to him, since he himself is the
instigator of it.
To which virginity replies:
What this life is worth I leave to others to decide.
But for me there is only one law, one purpose:
that, filled with the love of God,
I may depart from here to the God who reigns in heaven,
who is the Creator of the light . . .
To him alone have I bound myself by love.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN On Virginity, Dogmatic Poems (PG 3 7,
5 3 7-5 5 )

But o n the subject o f marriage i t is essential t o quote the testi­
mony of an author who despite his rigorism belongs, nevertheless, to
the pre-monastic period and regards human love, with the support
of the ecclesial community, as a spiritual way in its own right. For
Tertullian, this love ought to be unique, so he advised against a second
marriage after widowhood. (Even today, in the Eastern churches
that have preserved the original tradition of a married priesthood,
a widower who has married again cannot become a priest. )
How sweet the yoke that joins two of the faithful i n the same hope,
the same law, the same service! Both are brethren in the service of
the same Lord. They are truly two in one and the same flesh. And
where the flesh is one, the spirit is one. Together they pray . . .
instructing, encouraging and supporting each other in turn. They
are equal in the Church of God, equal at God's banquet, they share
equally troubles, persecutions, and consolations. They hide nothing
from each other, they never avoid each other's company, they never
cause each other pain . . . Christ rejoices to see such a couple and
he gives them his peace. Where they are, there he is himself.
TERTULLIAN To his Wife, II, 9 (PL I , I J 02)

And always the last word belongs to compassion, in the strongest
sense of the word. ' He who says he is in the light and hates h is brother
is in the darkness still' ( 1 John 2.9 ).

2 92

Approaches to Contemplation

Better to be one living in the world and devoting himself to the
service of a sick brother than to be a hermit who has no pity for
his neighbour.
EVAGRIUS OF PONTUS Mirror of Monks, 34 (Gressman, p. 1 5 6)

The certainty that the monks acquired of the transcendence of
the person enabled the theologians and spiritual writers of early
Christianity to assert, in opposition to the patriarchal attitude of the
Mediterranean world, the complete equality of man and woman.
Woman has the same spiritual dignity as man. Both of them have
the same God, the same Teacher, the same Church. They breathe,
see, hear, know, hope and love in the same way. Beings who have
the same life, grace and salvation are called . . . to the same manner
of being.
CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA Tutor, 1 ,4 (PG 8,260)

Sacred Scripture does not set men and women in opposition to one
another in respect to sex. Sex does not constitute any difference in
the sight of God.
0RIGEN Homilies on Joshua, 9 (GCS 8,3 5 6)