sweetness and splendour. Doubtless he has to wait about through
years of hardening and spiritual insensitivity before he can rediscover
the vulnerable and astonished child.
The hell of the fallen condition is abolished in Christ. Everything
now depends not on merits, but on faith and love, on the relationship
of each individual with Christ and with the neighbour. The early
Church with its gaze fixed wholly on the Parousia had no conception
either of the present existence of souls definitely damned, nor of an
already consummated beatitude for the saints (or even for Christ,
according to Origen), nor again of a 'purgatory' in the strictest sense
of the word, meaning penal 'satisfaction' of a j uridical nature, such as
developed in the mediaeval West. What we find rather in the Fathers is
the idea of a progressive purification and healing. After death the soul
crosses either a 'sea of fire' or spiritual 'frontier', where the powers of
evil wrest from it what belongs to them and leave it stripped, ready to
embark on a life of peace and silence (the 'abodes', one above another,
of which St Ambrose speaks here suggest a progressive perfecting).
Thus the 'sleep' of death appears as a contemplative state. Death,
undoing the tangles of idolatry and sin, offers the soul that peace,
quies, hesychia, which spiritual persons know already here below,
a blissful visitation of Christ who is always present in hell. For
since Holy Saturday and the Ascension he is the fulfilment of all
things. The Church does not forget that for the dead, fixed on their
ignorance or greed or pride, there are states in which the peace, the
silence, the light, and the glimpse of the Physician's presence are
experienced as torments. But the Church with all her love and all
her power of intercession - that intercession for the damned to which
Peguy's Joan of Arc summoned the saints - prays for all the dead,
including those who are in transitory 'hells'. That is so especially in
the Byzantine rite during the 'prayers of genuflexion' at the Vespers of
Pentecost. The love of God, multiplied by the prayers of the faithful,
works from within upon the individual in order that, since no one is
alone, each may, with a personal effort, become opened up to the
ontological unity of the Body of Christ.
As for the communion of the angels and the saints, they keep
watch over the slow and painful exodus of humanity towards the
Kingdom. As discarnate souls, the saints after their death, which
is for them a very simple passing over 'to the other side of things',
also keep watch in the light for the ultimate transfiguration of
the cosmos and therewith of their bodies. They await the fulfil­
ment of the illimitable human and divine communion when God
shall be manifestly 'all in all'.

The Difficult Love

299

One day a soldier asked an elder whether God grants pardon to
sinners. The elder answered, 'Tell me, my good friend, if your cloak
is torn, do you throw it away?' The soldier replied, 'No. I mend it
and continue to use it.' The elder concluded, 'If you take good care
of your cloak, will not God be merciful to his own image?'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers (In T. Merton, p. I I 3 )

God i n his love punishes, not to take revenge, far from it. He
seeks the restoration of his own image and does not prolong his
anger.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 73 (p. 2 8 5 )

In their waiting and preparing for the Parousia, spiritual people
are impelled to pray for the salvation of all by their sense of universal
fellowship in Christ, and by their conviction that the only way to be
saved is to accept responsibility for all. Dionysius the Areopagite
powerfully reminds us that we ourselves cannot condemn or damn
anyone at all, and that our zeal to 'avenge God' in fact shuts us into
the hell of our own vindictiveness. It is true that thunderbolts were
needed to protect the Hebrew people, that amazing l aboratory of
humanity, from idolatry. But the coming of Christ was the coming of
a fellowship without limits. Jesus refused to let the Samaritans who
would not receive him be consumed by fire ( Luke 9 · 5 3 ). He prayed
for his executioners, he remains close to those who reject him and
makes himself their advocate. In Jesus, God is not one who hurls
thunderbolts but one who lets himself be crucified.
Is it not true that Christ draws near with love to those who turn
away from him? That he struggles with them, begs them not to
scorn his love, and if they show only aversion and remain deaf to
his appeals, becomes himself their advocate?
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Letter 8, To Demophilus (PG 3 , I o 8 5 )

For those who have behaved wickedly towards him, Jesus during
his Passion implores the Father's forgiveness. But he reproaches
his disciples who thought it right to punish mercilessly the hy­
pocrisy of his Samaritan persecutors (Luke 9.53). Now, what
you have the audacity to repeat thousands of times in your letter
is that you have not been seeking personal revenge but venge­
ance on God's behalf. Tell me then truly, is it with evil that one
avenges him who is Goodness itself ?

300

Approaches to Contemplation

'We have not a high priest who is unable to sympathize with
our weaknesses' (Hebrews 4· r 5 ). On the contrary he knows nothing
of wickedness and has compassion on us. 'He will not wrangle or
cry aloud' (Matthew 1 2. 19), for 'He is gentle' (ibid. 1 1 .29) and
'He is the expiation for our sins' (I John 2.2). Therefore we
cannot tolerate outbursts of anger. They do not bear witness
to true zeal, not even if you were to invoke a thousand times
the examples of Phineas (Numbers 2 5 .1 ) and Elijah ( r Kings r 8.4o).
When those of his disciples who did not at all share the spirit of
gentleness and kindness invoked those precedents, Jesus was not
in the least impressed by them (Luke 9· 54). So it is that our
divine Master instructs with benevolence those who set them­
selves against the divine teaching. For the ignorant need to be
instructed, not punished. You do not strike a blind man; you
take him by the hand to lead him.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Letter 8, To Demophilus (PG 3 , 1096)