Faith is the way - with the risk that it entails. The cards are not
turned up before they are played. Only faith and interior purification
can open the eyes of the heart to contemplation, which is never more
than a partial anticipation of what we shall see in the Kingdom.
'I am the way, and the truth, and the life' (John q.6). Faith
is our way, contemplation is the truth and the life. 'For now we
see in a mirror dimly' (I Corinthians 1 3 . 1 2). This is faith. ' But then
face to face.' This is contemplation. Paul says again: 'Christ dwells
in our hearts according to the inner man by faith.' That is the road
along which we can catch glimpses only. But he adds: 'You will
know the love of Christ which surpasses all knowledge and you
will be filled with all the fullness of God' (cf. Ephesians 3 . 1 6-19).
Contemplation is this fullness . . . 'You have died,' he says again,
'and your life is hid with Christ in God.' That is faith. But 'when
Christ who is our life appears, then you also will appear with him
in glory' (Colossians 3.3-4). That is the vision of God.
'Beloved,' John says, 'we are God's children; it does not yet
appear what we shall be.' That is faith. But he goes on: 'We know
that when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as
he is.' (I John 3.2). That is contemplation . . .
'Jesus then said to the Jews who had believed in him, "If
you continue in my word, you are truly my disciples, and you
will know the truth and the truth will make you free"' (John
8.3 1-32). They had faith. They were beginning to walk in Christ
as along a road. That is why he invites them to walk along
it right to the end. What end? He tells them, 'The truth will
make you free.' Free from what . . . if not from corruption and
death?
This journey, this road, faith, obliges me to repeat those
words of the apostle: 'Since we have these promises, beloved,
let us cleanse ourselves from every defilement of body and spirit,
and make holiness perfect in the fear of God' (2 Corinthians
7.1).
There are some who would like to discover pure and unchang­
ing truth by themselves before believing. But only a heart that has
been purified can enable them to contemplate it. 'Blessed are the
pure in heart, for they shall see God' (Matthew 5.8). Otherwise
they would be like blind men thinking they can be cured by turning
their unseeing eyes towards the sun. Who can possibly contemplate
its light before recovering his sight?
AuGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermons, 3 46,2 (PL 3 8 , 1 5 23 -4 )

Confidence and Humility

151

We have no other way but Christ. To him w e cling in a l l our
anguish, in all our inability to repent, to purify ourselves, to pray.
For he is our repentance, our cleansing, our prayer. It is in him that
'anguish for death' becomes 'anguish for God'. For God incarnate,
descending to hell, chose the way of horror in order to set us free. The
two greatest spiritual masters of the golden age, St Isaac of Nineveh
and St John Climacus, bear converging witness on this point. We
need to listen to Isaac's cry, his supplication de profundis - and we
are reminded of that other Isaac, the original one when he saw his
father's knife flashing over him, and God intervened . . .
Lord Jesus, our God,
who wept for Lazarus,
and shed for him tears of grief and compassion,
accept the tears of my bitterness.
By thy sufferings assuage my suffering.
By thy wounds heal my wounds.
By thy blood cleanse my blood.
Pour out on my body the perfume of thy life-giving body.
For the gall that thou wast given to drink changes the bitterness
of my soul into sweetness . . .
May thy body stretched on the wood of the cross draw to thee my
spirit crushed by the demons . . .
May thy sacred hands pierced with the nails snatch me from the pit
of damnation and bring me back to thee, as thou hast promised.
May thy face which suffered blows and spittle enlighten my face
that is defiled by my wrongdoing.
May thy soul which on the cross thou didst give back to thy
Father lead me by thy grace to thee.
I have no broken heart to start me on the quest for thee,
no penitence, no tenderness . . .
I have no tears with which to pray to thee.
My spirit is in darkness . . . my heart is cold . . .
I know not how to make it warm again by tears of love for thee.
But thou, Lord Jesus Christ, my God,
do thou give me complete repentance, the breaking of my heart,
that with my whole soul I may set out in quest of thee.
Without thee I should be without all reality . . .
May the Father who in his womb begot thee in eternity
renew in me thine image.
I have forsaken thee. Do not thou forsake me.
I have wandered far from thee. Do thou set out in quest of me.

Initiation for Warfare

152

Lead me back to thy pastures with the sheep of thy flock.
Feed me together with them on the fresh grazing of thy mysteries
where the pure heart dwells,
the heart that bears in it the splendour of thy revelations . . .
May we be worthy of such splendour through thy grace
and by thy love for humankind, 0 Jesus Christ our Saviour,
for ever and ever. Amen.
IsAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 2 (Spanos, pp. IO- I I )

We need to exercise ourselves greatly, to lay upon ourselves many
hidden labours after a life of negligence, in order that our spirit
which resembles a greedy and irritable dog may attain purity and
vigilance through simplicity, gentleness and fervour. However, be
of good heart. If the passions lord it over us and we are weak,
let us with great confidence offer to Christ our spiritual weakness
and our impotence; let us confess them before him. He will help
us irrespective of what we deserve, on the sole condition that we
descend continually to the bottom, into the abyss of humility.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 1st Step, 17 ( 2 1 )
p. 16

Faith i s t o know that w e are loved. I t i s to answer love with love.
'Love me with love, you who are loved.' To love God is not a duty
but a cry of recognition, when we understand that he has first loved
us, even to the horror of the cross, of hell. Then our timid liberty is
stirred, our heart is moved and all that matters henceforward is that
wound by which life comes to us. 'I walk with a song in my heart
for thy love has wounded me,' as St John Climacus says.
The Bride says, 'I am wounded by love' (Song of Songs 2.5). By
these words she designates the arrow that sinks deep into her
heart. Love is the archer. Now love is God . . . God shoots his
chosen arrow, his only begotten Son, first moistening the three
tips of its point with the life-giving Spirit. Now the point is faith,
and faith makes not only the arrow but the archer also to pen­
etrate its target, in accordance with the word of the Lord: 'My
Father and I are one and we shall come to him and make our
dwelling in him' (John 14·23 ).
Thus the soul is uplifted by this divine elevation and sees in
itself the sweet arrow of love with which it has been wounded, and
glories in its wounding in the words; 'I am wounded by love'.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Homilies on the Song of Songs, 4 (PG 44,8 52)

Confidence and Humility

153