In Christ the Holy Spirit imparts to human beings a renewed
sonship of God. They share in the eternal procreation of the Son.
They are introduced into the heart of the Trinity. Deification is
identified with this adoption.
'In him [Christ] the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily,' says
St Paul (Colossians 2.9 ). And John the Theologian reveals this
sublime mystery to us when he says that the Word dwells among
us (John 1 . 1 4). For we are all in Christ, and the humanity we all
share in him regains its life in him. The Word dwelt amongst us
through a single Person in order that, from the one true Son of
God, his dignity might pass into all humankind by means of the

264

Approaches to Contemplation

sanctifying Spirit, and through a single Person the words might
be fulfilled, 'I say, "You are gods, sons of the Most High, all of
you'" (Psalm 82.6; John 10.34).
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Commentary on John's Gospel, 1 , 1 4
(PG 7 3 , 1 6 1 )

It is a transformation made possible by the Church, in so far as
it is 'mystery' - sacrament in the ontological sense - and unites us
with the human nature of the Word, that is full to the brim with
divine energies, with the presence and power of the Pneuma.
[The body of the Word] in its own nature has been enriched with
the Word who is united to it. It has become holy, life-giving, full
of the divine energy. And in Christ we too are transfigured.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA That Christ is One (PG 7 5 , 1 269)

[Christ] fills his whole body with the life-giving energy of the Spirit.
For henceforward he calls his flesh Spirit without denying that it is
flesh . . . It is united in fact to the Word who is life.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Commentary on fohn's Gospel, 6,64 (PG
73,604)

The Alexandrine Fathers, and especially St Cyril, developed
this mysticism of the adoption that deifies. Only the Word is the
Son by nature, but in his body, in his Spirit, we become 'sons
by participation'. This is an energy-based, spirit-filled Christo logy
in which the humanity is shot through with the brightness of the
divinity like iron red-hot in the fire.
Participation in the Holy Spirit gives human beings the grace to be
shaped as a complete copy of the divine nature.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Treasure, 1 3 (PG 75,228)

Anyone who receives the image of the Son, that is the Spirit,
possesses thereby in all fullness the Son, and the Father who is
in him.
CYRIL OF ALEXANDRIA Treasure, 33 (PG 7 5 , 5 72)

To be deified is therefore to become someone living with a life
stronger than death, since the Word is life itself and the Spirit is the
one who brings life. All human possibilities are brought into play. The

265

Enstasy - Ecstasy

structures of thought, feeling, friendship, creativity, while remaining
only human structures, receive an infinite capacity for light and joy
and love.
It is not possible to live without life and there is no life ex­
cept by participation in God. Such participation consists in seeing
God and rejoicing in his fullness.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,20,5 (SC 100 his, p. 642)

The glory of God is a living person and the life of humanity is the
vision of God. If the revelation of God through creation already
gives life to all living beings on earth, how much more does the
manifestation of the Father through the Son give life to those who
see God.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,2o,7 (SC 1 00 his, p. 648 )

God i s himself the life of those who participate i n him.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, V,7,1 (SC p. 1 5 J ,86-8)

Thus holiness is life in its fullness. And there is holiness in each
human being who participates vigorously in life. There is holiness not
only in the great ascetic but in the creator of beauty, in the seeker after
truth who heeds the mystery of creation, both living and inanimate, in
the deep love of a man and a woman, in the mother who knows how
to console her child and how to bring it to spiritual birth.
The saints are the living ones: and the living ones are the saints.
ORIGEN Commentary on John's Gospel,

2,n

(GCS 4,74)

Let us bear in mind that the virtues are divine-human: they are a
sharing in the attributes of God. Through them God becomes human
in the human being and makes the human being God.
The spirit that is united to God by prayer and by love acquires
wisdom, goodness, power, beneficence, generosity . . . in a word,
that person bears the attributes of God.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, III, 5 2 (PG 90,
1 00 1 )

In the deified person i s reconstituted the single sense that brings
together intellect, emotions and vigour, and transfigures them into

266

Approaches to Contemplation

the divine light. ' Your youth is renewed like the eagle's,' says the
psalm (Psalm I 0 3 . 5 ) .
Spiritual awareness teaches us that the soul has only one natural
sense . . . shattered in consequence of Adam's disobedience. But it
is restored to unity by the Holy Spirit . . . In those who are detached
from the lusts of life, the spirit, because it is thus freed, acquires its
full vigour, and can experience in an ineffable manner the divine
fullness. It then imparts its joy to the body itself . . . 'In him,' says
the psalmist, 'my flesh has blossomed afresh'.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 25 (SC 5 bis, p. 9 6-7)
Already here below, the human being becomes one who is 'risen
again'. This is the 'little resurrection' of which Evagrius speaks. It
anticipates the definitive victory over death and the transfiguration
of the cosmos that will happen at the moment of the Parousia.
Communion with God is, then, a sharing in his very being. By
grace, according to the energy, the sharers are identified with him in
whom they share. Motion and rest balance and reinforce each other:
rest in the identity, motion in the irreducible otherness.
The aim of faith is the true revelation of its object. And the true
revelation of faith's object is ineffable communion, with him, and
this communion is the return of believers to their beginning as
much as to their end . . . and therefore the satisfaction of desire.
And the satisfaction of desire is the stability, eternally in motion,
of those who desire, around the object of their desire . . . result­
ing in eternal enjoyment of it without any separation . . . the
sharing in the things of God. And this sharing in the things of
God is the similarity between the sharers and him in whom they
share. And this similarity, thanks to the energy, becomes identity
of the sharers with him in whom they share . . . This identity is
deification.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, 59 (PG 90,202)

Only apparent contradiction can convey the meaning of dei­
fication. The human being while remaining completely human is
completely enlightene1:i by glory.
The deified person, while remaining completely human in nature,
both in body and soul, becomes wholly God in both body and

Enstasy - Ecstasy

267

soul, through grace and the divine brightness of the beatifying
glory that permeates the whole person.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 I , I o 8 8 )