For his own part God could have given human beings the fullness
right from the beginning, but they were incapable of receiving it
because they were only little children.
IREN.'EUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV, J 8 , 1 (SC 100 bis,

p.

946)

It is precisely in this that God differs from humanity: God cre­
ates; humanity is created. He who creates is always the same,
while they who are created must acknowledge a beginning, an
intermediate state and a maturity . . . They receive knowledge
and progress towards God. For in so far as God is always the
same, to that extent human beings found in God will always be
making progress towards God.
IREN.'EUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV, I I , 2 (SC 1 00 bis,

p.

500)

How could you be God when you have not yet become human?
How could you be complete when you have only j ust been
created?
IREN.'EUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,39,2 (SC 100 bis,

p.

9 64)

That is why God drove them out of paradise and carried them off
far away from the tree of life. It was not because he refused them
this tree of life out of jealousy, as some have had the audacity to
maintain. No, it was because he acted out of compassion in order
that human beings might not remain transgressors for ever, that
the sin with which they found themselves burdened might not be
immortal, that the evil should not be without end and therefore
without remedy. God therefore halted them in their transgression
by interposing death . . . by setting them a term through the
dissolution of the flesh which would take place in the earth, in
order that human beings, by 'dying to sin' (Romans 6.2), should
begin one day to 'live to God'.
IREN.'EUS O F LYONS Against Heresies, II1,23,6 (SC 2 1 r,

pp.

460-2)

The resurrection therefore, through Christ, opens for humanity
the way of love that is stronger than death. The i mage of God is
restored, death becomes passover, adopted humanity receives the
'light of the Father'. The glory of the godhead comes to it through

88

Understanding the Mysteries

the infinitely human presence of Christ. The fire by becoming in­
carnate acts as milk for humanity still a child. God's abasement
allows of humanity's elevation.
Reproved first in many ways . . . corrected by the word, the Law,
the prophets, by benefits, by threats, by chastisements, by water
and fire, by victory, by defeats, signs coming from heaven, signs
coming in the air, in men and nations, by unexpected upheavals,
all of them aimed at breaking the power of evil, humanity needed a
more effective remedy in the end to heal ills that were only growing
worse . . . The last of these evils, which is also the first, is idolatry
which transfers to creatures the worship due to the Creator alone.
These misfortunes required more powerful aid if they were to be
tackled effectively. That aid was not lacking. It was the Word of
God himself, beyond time, beyond sight, beyond comprehension,
incorporeal, principle born of principle, light sprung from light,
fountain of life and immortality, faithful impression of the Pattern,
invariable seal, representation of the Father in every way like him;
humanity's purpose and raison d'etre: the Word takes on the image
of himself, he clothes himself in flesh to save our flesh, he is imbued
with reasoning intellect on behalf of my intellect, purifying and
correcting what is like himself . . . As God he committed himself
to humanity, one single selfsame being sprung from two opposing
principles, flesh and spirit, the one divine, the other accorded the
grace of divinity. What a strange conjunction! What a paradoxical
union! He who is, enters the contingent. The Uncreated One, the
Unbounded, is introduced into the world . . . he occupies the middle
ground between the subtlety of God and the density of the flesh. His
richness wears the face of my poverty . . . that I may be enriched by
his divinity . . . What is this mystery concerning my condition? I
received the image of God and did not know how to keep it. God
put on my flesh to save this image and to make the flesh immortal.
He offers us a new covenant much more wonderful than the first.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 45, For Easter, 9 (PG 3 6, 8 5 1-2)

In the last times, when our Lord summed up all things in himself,
he came to us, not as he could have come, but as we were
capable of seeing him. He could, in fact, have come to us in his
inexpressible glory, but we were not yet able to bear it. Accord­
ingly, as to children, the perfect Bread of the Father gave himself
to us under the form of milk - his coming as man - in order

The Human Vocation

89

that we should be fed so to speak at the breast by his incarnation
and by this diet of milk be accustomed to eat and drink the Word
of God. In this way we might be enabled to keep within us the
Bread of Immortality which is the Spirit of the Father.
IRENlEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV, 3 8 , r (SC r oo bis,
pp. 946-8)

It was in this way that the Father's light broke upon the flesh of
our Lord. Then radiating from his flesh it came into us, and thus
human beings had access to incorruptibility, enveloped as they
were by the light of the Father.
IRENlEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,2o,2 (SC r oo bis, p. 630)
The Son of God was made man so that man might become son of
God.
IRENlEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III,ro,2 (SC 2 r r , p. u 8 ) ; r 6, 3
( p . 29 8 ) ; 1 9 , r ( p . 3 74 ) ; V,pref. (SCr 5 3 , p . r 4 )

The Word was made flesh . . . to destroy death and give life.
IRENlEUS OF LYONS Demonstration of the Apostolic Preaching, 3 7
(PO r 2,687)

In Christ, indeed, human nature is henceforward capable of
receiving the Holy Spirit, the power of resurrection.
The Spirit also came down on the Son of God made Son of Man,
and became accustomed to dwelling together with him in the human
race and to taking his rest among humankind.
IRENlEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III, r 7 , I (SC 2 r r , p. 3 3 0)
The Spirit abides in the Son from all eternity. He constitutes the
Messianic unction of the Son come in the flesh. In the same way he
alights on his Body the Church. The Spirit thus anoints all who seek
consciously to live in Christ and thereby become other 'Christs', at
once saved and saviours, to be set apart to work for the salvation of
the world.
The countless lamps which are burning were all lit at the same fire,
that is to say they were all lighted and are all shining through
the action of one and the same substance. Thus Christians shine
brilliantly through the action of the divine fire, the Son of God.
Their lamps that have been lit are in the depth of their heart

90

Understanding the Mysteries