another.) All history, all cultures, animated by the presence of the
cosmic Logos, form the setting; but the only place where there can
be neither confusion nor separation is Christ.
Just as at the centre of a circle there is a single point at which all
the radii meet, so one who has been judged worthy to reach God
recognizes in him, by a direct awareness and without formulating
thoughts, all the essences of created objects.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Gnostic Centuries, 11,4 (PG 90, 1 1 25-8)

In knowledge, the spirit offers the spiritual essences of the universe
as so many gifts which it makes to God. In existence, the spirit
receives the gifts, making explicit by its life all the splendour of
the divine wisdom that is invisibly immanent in creatures.
MAXIM US THE CONFESSOR Questions to Tha/assius, 5 I (PG 90,
4 80- 1 )

A s for the Saints, i t i s i n union with God that they receive
spiritual awareness of created objects. They see the world in God,
permeated by his light and forming a whole in the hollow of his hand.
This is what St Benedict was doing when he contemplated the whole
universe gathered up in a ray of the divine glory.
While the disciples were still sleeping, Benedict the man of God
was already keeping vigil, anticipating the hour of the night office.
Standing in front of his window in the dead of night he was praying
to the Lord Almighty when suddenly he saw a light shining, and
it dispelled the darkness and sparkled with such brilliance that it
would have outshone the light of day. While he was watching it
something extraordinary happened. As he described it later, the
whole world was gathered up before his eyes as if in a ray of
sunlight . . .
How is it possible for the whole world to be seen in this way
by a human being? . . .
To one who sees the Creator, the whole of creation is limited.
But one glimpse of God's light makes everything that has been
created seem too narrow. The light of interior contemplation in
fact enlarges the dimensions of the soul, which by dint of expanding
in God transcends the world. Should I say this? The soul of the
contemplative transcends itself when, in God's light, it is trans­
ported beyond itself. Then, looking below itself, it understands
how limited is that which on earth seemed to it to have no

Approaches to Contemplation

226

limits. Such a seeker . . . could not have had that vision except
in God's light. It is not surprising that he should have seen the
whole world gathered up in his presence, since he himself in the
light of the Spirit was lifted up out of this world. When it is said
that the world was gathered up before his eyes that does not
mean that heaven and earth were contracted. No. The soul of
the seer was expanded. Enraptured with God he was able to see
without difficulty everything that is under God.
GREGORY THE GREAT Dialogues, 11, 3 5 (PL 66,19 8-200)

The sun that rises and illumines the world makes itself visible as
well as the objects it illumines. It is the same with the Sun of right­
eousness. When he rises in a mind that has been purified, he makes
himself seen in addition to the logoi of the objects he has created.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Centuries on Charity, I, 9 5 (PG 90)

Deep within Shinto temples in Japan you find only a mirror. It is
a symbol and a riddle. The risk there is of turning in upon the Self. But
the Christian knows that the Self is the image of Christ. And Christ
is the faithful mirror who reflects the truth not only of creatures and
objects, but also of the Self that is no longer an undifferentiated abyss
but the interior expression of a face.
See! The Lord is our mirror:
open your eyes,
look into it,
learn what your faces are like!
Odes of Solomon, 13 (Harris-Mingana, 11,276).

From that moment on nothing is profane. Nor is anything sacred
of itself any more. The real division is between the profane and
the sanctified. And everything can be sanctified: not only cosmic
realities, but objects produced by human beings apparently for the
most ordinary uses. This surprising importance of the commonplace,
which some artists of our time try to bring out - for example by
putting some utilitarian object on a pedestal - is perceived by the
spiritual person, who quite naturally respects it.
Look upon all the tools and all the property of the monastery as
if they were sacred altar vessels.
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, XXI, 10 (Centenario, p. 7 6 )

The Glory of God Hidden in His Creatures

227

The person who is sanctified in this way includes all created
things in his love and in his prayer. His charity extends to the
cosmos. Reading the lines that follow from St Isaac of Nineveh
we are reminded of certain Buddhist texts. Yet from the biblical
point of view created things are not 'temporary aggregations', they
are perfectly real. And their suffering is real too, the horror that
is multiplied by the powers of darkness, to which the world is
continually given over as prey by our sin. About this agony it might
be said that Christ, and the saints with him, are perpetually being
crucified in order to impart to all things, 'even to serpents', a life
freed from all forms of death, an aspect stressed by St Isaac.
What is purity, briefly? It is a heart full of compassion for the
whole of created nature . . . And what is a compassionate heart?
He tells us: 'It is a heart that burns for all creation, for the birds,
for the beasts, for the devils, for every creature. When he thinks
about them, when he looks at them, his eyes fill with tears. So
strong, so violent is his compassion . . . that his heart breaks when
he sees the pain and the suffering of the humblest creature. That is
why he prays with tears every moment . . . for all the enemies of
truth and for all who cause harm, that they may be protected and
forgiven. He prays even for serpents in the boundless compassion
that wells up in his heart after God's likeness.'
IsAAc O F NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 81 {p. 306)
The 'contemplation of nature' can give spiritual flavour to our
lives even if we lay no claim to be in any way 'mystics' in the rather
particular sense that this word has acquired in the West. A little loving
attention in the light of the Risen Christ is enough. The humblest
objects then breathe out their secret. The person becomes the priest of
the world at the altar of his heart, celebrating that 'cosmic liturgy' of
which Maximus the Confessor speaks. Language, work, art, culture,
the humanities, find their meaning there because the Logos,
while hiding himself for our benefit in a mysterious way, in the
logoi, shows himself to our minds to the extent of our ability to
understand, through visible objects which act like letters of the
alphabet, whole and complete both individually and when related
together. He, the undifferentiated, is seen in differentiated things,
the simple in the compound. He who has no beginning is seen in
things that must have a beginning; the invisible in the visible; the
intangible in the tangible. Thus he gathers us together in himself,

228

Approaches to Contemplation

through every object . . . enabling us to rise into union with him,
as he was dispersed in coming down to us.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 1 , 1 288)