the test made by God of Adam's freedom and trust, the early Church
perceived the commandment of fasting. Human beings, instead of
hurling themselves on the world as on to their prey, ought to have
learned to see it as a gift from God and a ladder by which to reach
him. From this point of view sin now appears as exploitation and
selfishness, the desire to make use of and consume the world instead
of transfiguring it. Christ, by contrast, fasted for forty days in the
desert to show the tempter that 'man shall not live by bread alone, but
by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God' ( Matthew 4.4),
and the world also is a word which comes from the mouth of God.
Fasting therefore signifies a radical change in our relation with
God and with the world. God - not the self - becomes the centre,
and the world is his creation, a dialogue amongst ourselves and with
the Creator. Fasting prevents us from identifying ourselves with the
world in order merely to possess it, and enables us to see the world
in a light coming from elsewhere. Then every creature, every thing,
becomes an object of contemplation. Fasting puts between·ourselves
and the world a wondering and respectful distance. It enables us to
hunger for God as well, and to welcome our bodily hunger as an
echo, the 'sighing' of creation.
And so for the Fathers fasting from food is inseparable from
prayer and almsgiving, from the loving relationship re-established
with God, and from spontaneous, inventive sharing with one's neigh­
bour. That was the real meaning of almsgiving in the first centuries.
Let us cherish fasting, for fasting is the great safeguard along with
prayer and almsgiving. They deliver human beings from death. Just
as Adam was driven out of paradise for having eaten, refusing to
trust, so it is by fasting and faith that they who wish to enter
paradise do so.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA On Virginity, 6 (PG 28 ,260)

Fasting lightens the body, prepares it for resurrection, and opens
it to healing grace. It makes the soul more readily transparent and
predisposes it to the study of Wisdom, to listening to the Word. It
makes sharing and mutual help possible.
God did not give the body to be an obstacle by means of its weight
. . . A lighter flesh he will raise more quickly to new life.
TERTULLIAN On Fasting, I7 (PL 2,97 8 )

Initiation for Warfare

1 42

Fasting is food for the soul, nourishment of the spirit.
AMBROSE OF MILAN On Eliiah and Fasting, 2,2 (PL 1 4,69 8 )

[One who fasts] feeds like Moses on familiarity with God and his
word. He experiences the truth of the text, 'Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of
God'.
jEROME Letter

I J O,

Io (PL 22,I I I 5 )

We have the days of Lent devoted to fasting. We have Wednesday
and Friday every week . . . And the Christian is free to fast at any
time, not out of superstition but in voluntary detachment . . . How
could anyone in fact study the Holy Scriptures, or devote himself
to knowledge and wisdom, if he were not master of his own mouth
and his own belly? But there is another reason, also spiritual, that
some apostles have praised in their letters . . . Blessed are they that
fast for the sake of feeding the poor.
0RIGEN Homilies on Leviticus, 10,2 (PG 1 2,528)

Fasting makes prayer easier.
The prayer of one who fasts is an eagle in full flight. That of
the wine-bibber is made heavy with satiety and dragged down to
earth.
PsEuoo-NILUS (Evagrius of Pontus) On the Eight Spirits of Evil, I
(PG 79,I I 4 5 )

Yet the emphasis is always on the whole nature of fasting and
its purpose, and on moderation.
If the enemy suggests to you an extreme ascesis that risks making
your body feeble and useless, you must moderate your fasting.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA On Virginity, 8 (PG 28,26 1 )

Just a s the body i f it i s burdened with a multitude of foods
makes the spirit slack and lazy, so if it is enfeebled by excessive
abstinence it breeds despondency and aversion in the contemplative
part of the soul. It is necessary therefore to regulate the soul's
nourishment in accordance with the state of the body, so that
when the body is in good health it may be suitably controlled,

The Interior Combat

1 43

and when it is weak it can be reasonably strengthened. The athlete
must not be in poor physical shape.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 4 5 (SC 5 bis, p. I I I )

Fasting is capable o f making u s bad-tempered, or o f giving us
the good conscience of a Pharisee. Hence the constant call for respect
for one's neighbour, for the struggle against backbiting, and also for
sharing with the poor, and for the works of righteousness.
Abba Pambo asked Abba Anthony, 'What ought I to do?'
The old man told him, 'Do not put any trust in your right­
eousness, do not worry about the past, keep a tight rein on your
tongue and your belly.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anthony 6 (SO I, p. 2 I )

If you fast, but fail to keep watch over your mouth so as to refrain
from evil speaking and angry words, from lying and perjury; if you
slander your neighbour, even if the words come from the mouth of
one who is fasting, your fast will be of no avail and will be labour
lost.
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA On Virginity, 7 (PG 28,260)

What is the use of keeping a fast for forty days without considering
the meaning of it? What is the use denying oneself banquets, then
spending one's time in litigation? What is the use of not eating
the bread one possesses if one has to steal that of the poor?
. . . The Christian's fasting ought to foster peace, not quarrels.
What advantage is there in making one's stomach holy with fasting
and defiling one's lips with lies? Brother, you will be able to come
to church only if your feet are not entangled in the snares of
usury. You will have the right to pray only if envy does not
make an obstacle in your heart . . . The money you give to the
poor man will be given in all righteousness only if you have not
extorted it from another poor man . . .
So, let us imitate as far as possible Christ's fasting by our
practice of the virtues, in order that grace may come upon us
through the twofold fasting of body and spirit.
MAXIMUS OF TURIN Sermon for Lent, Homily 44,8 (PL 5 7 , I 3 5-6)

All ascesis, in fact, is magnetic attraction by love, by which
we are conformed to the crucified Christ. But the cross cannot be

144

Initiation for Warfare