The Father being the source and the Son being called a river,
we can be said to drink the Spirit. For it is written: 'All were
made to drink of one Spirit' ( 1 Corinthians 1 2. 1 3 ) . But, given the
Spirit to drink, we drink Christ . . .
And again: since Christ is the true Son, we, by receiving the
Spirit, are transformed into sons, 'For you did not receive the spirit
of slavery . . . but you have received the spirit of sonship' (Romans
8 . 1 5). Being transformed into sons by the Spirit, it is clear that it
is into Christ that we are transformed . . .
The Spirit has been given to us - as the Lord said: 'Receive
the Holy Spirit' (John 20.22) - God is in us. This is actually what
John wrote: 'If we love one another, God abides in us . . . by this
we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given
us of his own Spirit' (1 John 4.12- 1 3 ) . And God being in us, the
Son is also in us, for the Son himself says, '[The Father and I] will
come to him and make our home with him' (John 14.23 ).
And again: the Son is the life - for he says: 'I am the life' (John
14.6) - and we are brought to life in the Spirit according to the
saying: 'He who raised Christ Jesus from the dead will give life
to your mortal bodies also through his Spirit which dwells in you'
(Romans 8 . r r ) . And when we have been brought to new life in the
Spirit, Christ himself lives in us: ' . . . it is no longer I who live, but
Christ who lives in me' (Galatians 2.20).
ATHANASIUS OF ALEXANDRIA Letter to Serapion, 1,19 (PG 26,
5 7 3 -6)

A solitary God would not be 'Love without limits'. A God who
made himself twofold, according to a pattern common in mythology,
would make himself the root of an evil multiplicity to which he
could only put a stop by re-absorbing it into himself. The Three­
in-One denotes the perfection of Unity - of 'Super-unity', according
to Dionysius the Areopagite - fulfilling itself in communion and

God: Unity and Difference

75

becoming the source and foundation of all communion. It suggests
the perpetual surmounting of contradiction, and of solitude as well,
in the bosom of an infinite Unity. Each divine Person 'possesses unity
through his relationship with himself ' (St John of Damascus, On the
Orthodox Faith, 1,8 ) . The best image of the Father, according to 'a
monk of the Eastern Church', is the heart: ' Each heartbeat is an
impulse by which the Father gives himself. These beats send towards
us the Blood of the Son, given life by the breath of the Spirit' Uesus,
simples regardes sur le Sauveur, Chevetogne 1 9 5 9 , p. 144). It is in
this rhythm of the heart that we are called to participate.

5

The Human Vocation

The human vocation is to fulfil one's humanity by becoming God
through grace, that is to say by living to the full. It is to make
of human nature a glorious temple. 'Do not forget that to live
is glory', said Rilke on his deathbed. And it is a glory that over­
turns death, or rather, reverses it.
'The human being is an animal who has received the vocation to
become God.'
Words of BAS I L O F CJESAREA, quoted by GREGORY NAZIANZEN
Eulogy of Basil the Great, Oration 43, 48 (PG 3 6, 5 6o)

Every spiritual being is, by nature, a temple of God, created to
receive into itself the glory of God.
0RJGEN Commentary on St Matthew's Gospel, 1 6,23 (PG I J , I 4 5 3 )

The human being, God's image, has to attain to his likeness,
which is at once meeting and sharing, keeping closely to the great
Trinitarian sequence of the creation and re-creation of humanity.
That is the order, the rhythm, the movement by which created
humanity is fashioned after the image and likeness of the uncreated
God. The Father makes the decisions and gives the commands,
the Son carries them out and adapts them, the Spirit provides
nourishment and growth, and humanity progresses little by lit­
tle.
IRENJEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,J8,J (SC 100 bis,

pp.

95 4-6)

This development both personal and collective - the collective
being a dimension of the personal and not the other way round -

The Human Vocation

77

took on a tragic character with the 'fall' and 'redemption', but its
basic movement and its goal did not change.
It was necessary in the first place for human beings to be created;
and having been created, to grow; and having grown, to become
adult; and having become adult, to multiply; and having multiplied,
to become strong; and having become strong, to be glorified; and
having been glorified, to see their Lord. Indeed . . . the vision of
God obtains deliverance from death, the incorruptibility which is
the expression of our union with God.
IRENiEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,J8,J (SC

1 00

bis,

p.

9 5 6)

In the incarnation humanity is the 'boundary' or 'frontier' be­
tween the visible and the invisible, the carnal and the spiritual, like a
mediator between creation and the creator. This vocation is present
also in the non-biblical religions and also in modern humanism, in
the sciences and in the arts. But in these latter cases the vocation is
limited either by the absorption of the human in the divine or by the
assertion of the human being against God. It is the incarnation of the
Word that fully reopens to humanity its creative destiny.
The great Architect of the universe conceived and produced a
being endowed with both natures, the visible and the invisible:
God created the human being, bringing its body forth from the
pre-existing matter which he animated with his own Spirit . . .
Thus in some way a new universe was born, small and great at
one and the same time. God set this 'hybrid' worshipper on earth to
contemplate the visible world, and to be initiated into the invisible;
to reign over earth's creatures, and to obey orders from on high. He
created a being at once earthly and heavenly, insecure and immortal,
visible and invisible, halfway between greatness and nothingness,
flesh and spirit at the same time . . . an animal en route to another
native land, and, most mysterious of all, made to resemble God by
simple submission to the divine will.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration

45·

For Easter, 7 (PG J 6,8 so)

Humanity is called to take the world into itself, to 'comprehend'
it with its intelligence and its love, in order to articulate the worship
that the universe secretly offers, and to leave its own mark on the
world, 'to name the creatures', according to Genesis. Humanity is at

78

Understanding the Mysteries