The victory over death is a victory over biological death, which
is henceforward transformed into a 'passing over', part of a great
momentum of resurrection which must culminate in the manifesta­
tion of the Kingdom. The cosmos will be transfigured, in a manner
no longer secret and sacramental, but open and glorious. In this
universal metamorphosis persons, souls, will assume a bodily splen­
dr.ur, like Christ's at his transfiguration on the mountain, or after
his resurrection.
Therefore, and most important of all, victory over death is
also victory over spiritual death, which we experience daily and
in which, left to ourselves, we should risk being imprisoned for
ever. It is victory over hell. It is the certainty that henceforward
no one will be separated from God, but that all will be - indeed,
in a mysterious fashion, already are - immersed in his love. Vic­
tory over hell - this. is the wonderful message that the ancient
Church never ceased to proclaim.
[Christ speaks]
I have opened the gates that were bolted
I have shattered the bars of iron and the iron has become red-hot;
It has melted at my presence; and nothing more has been shut
Because I am the gate for all beings.
I went to free the prisoners; they belong to me
And I abandon no one . . .
I have sown my fruits in the hearts [of mortals]
And I have changed them into myself . . .

52

Understanding the Mysteries

they are my members, and I am their head.
Glory to thee, Lord Christ, our Head! Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, 17 (Harris-Mingana, pp. 289-90)
[Christ speaks]
I have stretched out my hands and offered myself to the Lord.
The stretching out of my hands is the sign of that [offering],
The stretching out on the wood
Where the Just One was hanged, by the roadside . . .
I am risen, I am with them,
I am speaking through their mouth . . .
I have laid on them the yoke of my love . . .
Hell saw me and was vanquished.
Death let me depart, and many with me.
I was gall and vinegar to it.
I descended with it to the depths of hell.
Death . . . could not bear my face.
I made of the dead an assembly of the living.
I spoke to them with living lips
so that my word should not be in vain.
They ran towards me, the dead.
They cried out, Take pity on us, 0 Son of God . . .
Deliver us out of the darkness that fetters us.
Open the gate for us that we may go out with thee.
We see that death has no hold on thee.
Deliver us also, for thou art our Saviour.
And I heard their voices and I traced my name on their heads.
So they are free and they belong to me.
Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, 42 (pp. 403 -5)
When he appears you shall say to yourself, 'My beloved speaks
and says, "Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away"' (Song
of Songs 2.10). I have opened the way for you, I have broken
your bonds, so come to me, my beloved. 'Arise, my beloved,
my fair one, my dove.' Why does he say 'Arise'? why 'Has­
ten'? For you I have endured the raging storms, I have borne
with the waves that would have assailed you; on your account
my soul became sorrowful even to death. I rose from the dead
after drawing the sting of death and loosing the bonds of hell.
Therefore I say to you, 'Arise, my fair one, and come away,

The God-Man

53

my dove; for lo, the winter is past, the rain is over and gone.
The flowers appear on the earth'. I have risen from the dead,
I have rebuked the storm, I have offered peace. And because,
according to the flesh, I was born of a virgin and of the will of
my Father, and because I have increased in wisdom and stature,
'the flowers appear on the earth'.
0RIGEN Homilies o n the Song o f Songs, 2, 1 2 ( S C 3 7, p . r o r )

Today is the day of salvation for the world . . . Christ is risen
from the dead: arise with him. Christ returns to himself: you
also must return to him. Christ has come forth from the tomb:
free yourselves from the fetters of evil. The gates of hell are
open and the power of death is destroyed. The old Adam is
superseded, the new perfected. In Christ a new creation is com­
ing to birth: renew yourselves.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 45, For Easter, r , r (PG 3 6,624)

Everything is summed up in the homily of John Chrysostom,
still read today at the very heart of the Easter Vigil in Orthodox
Churches.
Let every one who loves God rejoice in this festival of light!
Let the faithful servant gladly enter into the joy of his Lord!
Let those who have borne the burden of fasting come now to reap
their reward!
Let those who have worked since the first hour receive now their
just wage!
Let those who came after the third hour keep this festival with
gratitude!
Let those who arrived only after the sixth hour approach with no
fear: they will not be defrauded.
If someone has delayed until the ninth hour, let him come without
hesitation.
And let not the workman of the eleventh hour be ashamed: the
Lord is generous.
He welcomes the last to come no less than the first.
He welcomes into his peace the workman of the eleventh hour as
kindly as the one who has worked since dawn.
The first he fills to overflowing: on the last he has compassion.
To the one he grants his favour, to the other pardon.

54

Understanding the Mysteries

He does not look only at the work: he sees into the intention of
the heart.
Enter then all of you into the joy of your Master.
First and last, receive your reward . . .
Abstinent and slothful celebrate this feast.
You who have fasted, rejoice today.
The table is laid: come all of you without misgivings.
The fatted calf is served, let all take their fill.
All of you, share in the banquet of faith: all of you draw on the
wealth of his mercy . . .
Let no one weep for his sins: forgiveness is risen from the tomb.
Let no one fear death: the Saviour's death has set us free.
When it held him chained, he struck it down.
When he descended to hell, he plundered it.
He destroyed it for attacking his flesh, as Isaiah had foretold:
hell was dismayed at his coming.
It was dismayed because it was trampled on; it was in bitterness
because it was deceived.
It had taken hold of a body and was confronted by God.
It had taken hold of the visible, and the invisible had routed it.
Death, where is thy sting? Where, hell, thy victory?
Christ is risen and thou art brought to nothing.
Christ is risen and the devils are fallen.
Christ is risen and the angels rejoice.
Christ is risen and life has prevailed.
Christ is risen, and the dead are delivered from the grave.
For Christ, risen from the dead, is become the first fruits of those
who sleep.
To him be glory and might for ever and ever. Amen.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM Paschal Homily (Office of Matins for Easter in
the Byzantine Rite)

By the Ascension the Body of Christ, woven of our flesh and of
all earthly flesh, entered the realms of the Trinity. Henceforward the
creation is in God, it is the true 'burning bush' according to Maximus
the Confessor. At the same time it remains buried in the darkness
of death and separation because of humanity's hatred and cruelty
and irresponsibility. To become holy is to clear away this weight
of ashes and to uncover the glowing fire beneath, to allow life, in

The God-Man

55