God is felt by the 'feeling of the heart'. Others, more succinctly,
speak here of the 'feeling of God'. It is a paradox for minds formed
by the Greek language and Greek thought to associate the divine with
feeling. The whole of a philosophical tradition, in fact, could regard
only the mind, the intellect, the power of reasoning as in any way
similar to the divine. The fact that it is a question of a 'feeling' or of
bringing into play the heart, where all the faculties and all the senses
are gathered together, proves that it is a metamorphosis of the whole
personality, body and soul, by the divine energy. Diadochus speaks
more exactly of this organic unity when he notes that the 'feeling of
the heart' becomes a 'feeling of the bones' - the bones, that part
of the human being that is the hardest, the most alive, the mineral
concentration of life and its source (the connection between the
marrow of the bones and the blood is well known). When the divine
fire reaches this living stone, it transforms it into precious stone,
integrates it into the foundations of the heavenly Jerusalem, which are
b uilt of such precious stones. In this way the glorious body is formed.
One who knows God by the feeling of the heart has been known
by him: to the extent, in fact, that the person has received God's
love into the secret places of the soul, that person has become

256

Approaches to Contemplation

God's friend. Therefore such a one from then on lives with a burning
desire for the enlightenment of knowledge until it is recognizable by
the very feeling in the bones. The person no longer knows himself
but has been entirely transformed by God's love . . . Without respite
from now on the heart is ablaze with the fire of love, united to God
by an irresistible longing, since the person has been once and for
all torn away from the self by divine love.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 14 (SC

5 bis,

p. 9 1 )

The body o f slavery and death, tied to the 'spirit o f heaviness',
is dissolved in the waters of baptism, the waters of creation, and now
the glorious body is born, not just symbolically but in actual fact. Or,
if you prefer, the seed of baptism is now bearing its fruit.
Hence these powerful and meaningful expressions: 'I am dis­
solved', 'his limbs are melting'.
The disciple of Abba Silvanus, Zachary, went in and found
him in ecstasy with his hands stretched up to heaven. Closing
the door he went out. He came back at the sixth and the
ninth hour and found him in the same state. At the tenth
hour he knocked, went in and found him inwardly at peace.
So he said to him, 'How have you been today, Father?' Silvanus
replied, 'I was carried up to heaven and saw the glory of God.
And I stayed there until just now. And now I am dissolved.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Silvanus

3 (PG

65,409)

A different state overtakes us when we are going forward on the
path of life . . . and from on high the grace is given us to experience
the sweetness of the awareness of the Spirit. We receive the certainty
that God is watching over us . . . and we are full of admiration at
the spiritual nature of objects . . . It is then that the sweetness of
God and the fire of his love enter into us . . . This power is felt
when all the beings of the created world, all the objects that we
meet, are observed with contemplative attention . . . As a result
of this careful attention we attain to God's love from then on
and . are inebriated with it as if with wine. Our limbs melt. Our
spirit is outside itself. And our heart is carried away after God.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 40 (p. 1 69 )

It is an experience that is continually attested and renewed, of
light, or rather of fire. The heart is the crucible in which the divine
fire re-creates the personality. And there are numerous testimonies

Enstasy - Ecstasy

257

to show saints transfigured as Christ was transfigured on Tabor;
the rays of the divine light penetrated his flesh itself. And it is by
sharing in his very flesh through the mysteries of the Church that
the glorious body is awoken in us.
A brother came to Abba Arsenius's cell. He half-opened the door
and saw the Abba as it were all on fire.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Arsenius 27 (PG 6 5 ,96)

Ascesis . . . is setting a log of wood wholly on fire.
Sayings of Those who are Growing Old in Ascesis, 3 2 (SO I ,
p . 407)

One who watches carefully over the heart will quickly see how the
heart of its own nature is emitting light. As a coal catches fire, or
as the fire lights a candle, so does God set our heart ablaze as it
looks in contemplation at him who is dwelling in our heart.
HESYCHIUS OF BATOS On Vigilance, 104 (Philokalia I, I 5 7 )

Peter and the Sons of Thunder saw Beauty on the mountain, Beauty
that was shining brighter than the brilliance of the sun. Thus they
were judged worthy to see with their own eyes the pledge of his
coming in glory.
BASIL OF CIESAREA Homily on Psalm

45,

5 (PG 29,400)

Today the divine brightness in its limitless diffusion is shining for
the apostles on Mount Tabor . . . The divine light is radiating from
an earthly body. The glory of the godhead is emanating from a
mortal body . . . The godhead is triumphant and enables the body
to share in his own brightness and his own glory.
joHN OF DAMASCUS Homily on the Transfiguration of the Lord
(PG 96,54 5 , 5 4 8 )
5·

Martyrdom: Death-and-Resurrection

Martyrdom means witness. But to bear witness to Christ to the point
of death is to become one who has risen again. Christian martyrdom
is a mystical experience, the first attested in the history of the Church.
It is recorded right at the beginning by the example of Stephen the
'protomartyr' in the Acts of the Apostles thus: '[Stephen], full of the
Holy Spirit, gazed into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus

258

Approaches to Contemplation