boundless fertility in unifying and transfiguring the universe.
Humanity is freedom. But its properly personal freedom, thwarted
by philautia (self-centredness), invests in the 'passions' the deep
impulses of spontaneity or 'natural freedom' that actually can be
fulfilled only in God. Christ by his loving sacrificial life restores
that natural freedom and tries to re-direct our personal freedom
by his kenosis on the cross - the proof of his 'mad love'. By faith
and charity we conform ourselves to his mode of existence. Thereby
in this encounter we share in the compenetration of the divine
and human energies brought about in his 'composite hypostasis'.
Desire then finds its true meaning in the divine-human reality of
the virtues that are unified in love. Human existence becomes a
liturgy, an interiorizati o n and a cosmic extension of the 'mysteries'.
It becomes a 'mystagogy' of deification.
The Christian West was to lay the emphasis on our moral
communion with Christ, on the imitation by humanity of Christ's
filial mode of existence. The Christian East for its part was to insist
on humanity's ontological participation in the divine energies. Maxi­
mus' theology is an admirable synthesis of these two approaches.
And therein lies its relevance.
Centuries on Charity PG 90,9 59-1 080 also SC 9; Ascetic Dialogue

PG 90,9 1 2-1 080 cf. Ancient Christian Writers Vol. XXI for English
translations; Commentary on the Lord's Prayer PG 90,872-908;
A Hundred Theological and Economical Chapters PG 90, 1 0 8 3 1 1 24; Mystagogia PG 9 1 ,657-7 1 7; Quaestiones a d Thalassium P G
90,244-7 7 3 ; Letter o n Charity ( Letter 2) PG 9 1 ,3 9 1 -408; Ambigua
PG 9 1 , 1 0 3 2- 1 4 1 7; Gnostic Centuries S.L. Epifanovitch, Kiev, 1 9 1 7;
On the Divine Names PG 4,14-576 (Most of this text is by John of
Scythopolis. )
MELITO OF S ARDIS ( 2nd century)

Melito, bishop of Sardis in Lydia, was one of the 'great l uminaries' of
Christian Asia Minor in the second half of the second century. About
1 70, he addressed to Marcus Aurelius an Apology (of which only
fragments remain), in which he is one of the first to express the wish
for an alliance between Church and Empire, whereby Christianity
should be a source of prosperity and blessing for the Empire. Of
his considerable output the only item that has come down to us
intact, having recently been discovered among some papyri, is a

362

Biographical Notes

remarkable Easter Homily, vibrant with the original meaning of the
descent into hell and the resurrection.
Homily on Easter SC 1 23

ODES OF SoLOMON (early 2nd century)
This collection of 42 hymns was discovered in I 905 in a Syriac
manuscript. Before this only five of the hymns were known, in a
Coptic translation. The Odes date probably from the first half of
the second century. They were undoubtedly written in Greek for the
Christian communities of Syria. The attribution to Solomon was an
everyday procedure in the Jewish and Judaeo-Christian circles in
which apocrypha using famous authors' names abounded. The Odes
of Solomon is not an interpolated text either Gnostic or Jewish, as
some have supposed, but evidence of a Christian mysticism quite close
to the inspiration found in the Gospel and the Epistles of St John.
The Odes and Psalms of Solomon J.R. Harris-A. Mingana, 2 vols.

Manchester I 9 I 6- I 9 20
0RIGEN ( I 8 5 - 254)

Origen was the most powerful mind of early Christianity. His work
inspired Christian spirituality and exegesis both in the East and in
the West. But his philosophical hypotheses, which were organized
into a system by his disciples who abused his name, demanded of
the Church a painful process of discerning of spirits.
Origen was born at Alexandria into a particularly fervent Chris­
tian family. His father was a confessor of the faith and introduced
him while still very young to the knowledge of the Scriptures. His
family's property was confiscated for the crime of being Chris­
tian, so he earned a livelihood for his family by teaching. He was
scarcely eighteen years old when the Bishop of Alexandria entrusted
him with the catechetical instruction of candidates for baptism. He
was formed, in the footsteps of Pantaenus and Clement, at the
school of Ammonius Saccas, who was perhaps a Christian and was
the founder of Neo-Platonism and the future teacher of Plotinus.
But there was in him a thirst for martyrdom which he turned in
on himself, as he did with his erotic tendencies, by a relentless

Biographical Notes

363

ascesis, making himself in the most literal sense 'voluntarily a eunuch
for the Kingdom of God'.
His classes, open to all, aroused the interest of the pagans and
he was called upon to expound his teaching both to the Governor
of Arabia and to the mother of the Emperor. Difficulties with his
bishop led him to settle in 23 r at Caesarea in Palestine where, in
spite of the canons declaring a mutilated person ineligible, he was
ordained priest. He continued his teaching there. But martyrdom
that had been near him in childhood and in his work p ursued
him. During the Decian persecution he was cruelly tortured and
died shortly afterwards.
Origen created almost all the approaches indispensable to Chris­
tian thinking - religious philosophy, theology, ascetical and mystical
doctrine, preaching, but above all unflagging study of the Bible, from
large-scale commentaries to notes on points of detail, from philoso­
phy to popular sermons. His exegetical work no doubt presents
at first sight an academic appearance. He practised rabbinic and
J udaeao-Christian exegesis and edited the text of the Old Testament
in six columns (the Hexapla ) : the Hebrew text, its transcription
into Greek letters, and four ancient Greek translations, including
the Septuagint, with a whole system of critical signs to mark passages
added by the Septuagint or needing to be added to it from the
Hebrew. But it is all undergirded with spiritual dynamism, seeing that
the understanding of Scripture demands ascesis and contemplation.
Scripture embodies the mystery of Christ in order to feed the soul
with it. Scripture reveals to the soul, in proportion to its progress,
new aspects and new names of the Word. The Platonizing tendency
that keeps cropping up at Alexandria from the time of Philo seeks to
turn history into myth. But it is balanced, in Origen, by the sense of
the drama of salvation and by the mystery of the cross that is victory
over the power of the devil. Origen distinguishes, most often, three
kinds of meaning: the 'literal meaning' that corresponds to the body;
the 'moral meaning' that corresponds to the soul; and the 'spiritual
meaning' corresponding to the spirit. But the moral meaning often
extends beyond the ethical domain; it is derived from the mystical
meaning and expresses the life of the divine Word in the soul.
At the same time, in his treatise On Principles, Origen outlines
a vast philosophical and theological synthesis. After having recalled
the foundations accepted by everyone, he embarks on a series of ex­
planatory hypotheses in a hazardous attempt to reach understanding
of the faith. Spirits that were created equal and transparent - a sort of
collective Adam - abandoned God and separated from one another

364

Biographical Notes