He who created human beings in order to make them share in his
own fullness so disposed their nature that it contains the principle
of all that is good, and each of these dispositions draws them to
desire the corresponding divine attribute. So God could not have
deprived them of the best and most precious of his attributes,
self-determination, freedom . . .
GREGORY OF NYSSA Catechetical Orations, 5 (PG 4 5 ,24)

In the West this mystery of freedom was distorted by the necess­
ary but impetuous and exaggerated reaction of St Augustine to
the voluntarism of Pelagius. Increasingly freedom and grace were
contrasted by describing their respective roles in terms of causality.
Can the free will of human beings be the cause of their salvation,
as Pelagius claimed? Or is it the grace of God alone, as Augustine
said? The latter's intuition - I am a wretch who has been saved
gratuitously and so I sing Alleluia is correct existentially, subjec­
tively, but dangerous when stated objectively as part of a system. (In
the I 6th and I 7th centuries, as is well known, this view hardened
into the doctrine of twofold predestination, to salvation or to hell,
without the individual being able to do much about it.) The Greek
Fathers (and some of the Latin Fathers), according to whom the
creation of humanity entailed a real risk on God's part, laid the
emphasis on salvation through love: 'God can do everything except
force man to love him'. The gift of grace saves, but only in an
encounter of love. Grace envelops the individual, the whole person,
like an atmosphere ready to seep in through the smallest breach.
But only faith in its sovereign freedom can cause the breach to
be made. Then it becomes an active opening-up, the beginning of
a bandonment to the divine life. And for the good of humanity as a
whole some are 'set apart', for it is not the isolated individual but
humanity in communion, or rather, all human beings together, who
truly constitute the image of God. We can see that this 'complete
Adam', this 'single man', is fragmented; we are continually breaking
him in pieces. But Christ, the 'definitive Adam', puts him together
again, the same but different, in the likeness of the Trinity. For
St Gregory of Nyssa in particular the text 'Let us make man in
our image' concerns humanity considered in its ontological unity.
-

82

Understanding the Mysteries

It is the whole of [human] nature, extending from the beginning
to the end [of history], that constitutes the one image of Him who
IS.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On the Creation of Man, 1 6 (PG 44, 1 8 3 )

To say that there are 'many human beings' i s a common abuse of
language. Granted there is a plurality of those who share in the
same human nature . . . but in all of them, humanity is one.
GREGORY OF NYSSA That there are not three Gods (PG 4 5 , 1 1 7 )

On the other hand, it is the whole human being, soul and
body, that is in the image of God. The body, by receiving the
life-giving breath of the Spirit, is enabled to be the visible expression
of the person: to be not a mask but a face. Like the Bible, the
Fathers assert that only the unity of soul and body constitutes the
human being. The visible aspect of humanity would not exist if
it were not the invisible made visible. Soul and body must mutu­
ally symbolize each other, according to Maximus the Confessor.
That is why the Saints, even when they are very ugly, are beauti­
ful, with a beauty that springs from their intelligent and loving
hearts. The body is itself called to life and resurrection, therefore
similarly the cosmos, whose energies never cease to pass through
the body. In the 2nd century the Apostolic Fathers laid great em­
phasis on this dignity of the body. For them, Christianity pro­
claims, prepares and anticipates the resurrection of the flesh, as is
proved both by Christ's bodily resurrection and by his 'ascension',
which enabled earthly flesh (Merejkovsky's 'holy flesh of earth') to
penetrate into God himself. Such an idea is at the very opposite
pole from any ontological dualism, either the dualism of a degen­
erate Platonism where the body is the tomb of the soul and only
the soul is akin to the divine world, or that of Manicheism and
Gnosticism which regard bodily existence as the creation of an evil
Demiurge.
As a result early Christianity was fundamentally concerned not
with the immortality of the soul, which was regarded as incontro­
vertible but contrary to nature and only provisional, but with the
resurrection of the body, of the cosmos as a whole, the body of
humanity. The whole of the Church's life should be a 'laboratory
for the resurrection' (Dumitru Staniloae); it ought to vibrate with a
mighty resurrectional upsurge embracing all humanity and the whole
universe.

The Human Vocation

83

It is not in a part of [human] nature that the image is found, but
nature in its totality is the image of God.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On the Creation of Man, (PG 44,1 8 5 )

Spirits without bodies will never be spiritual men and women. I t is
our entire being, that is to say, the soul and flesh combined, which
by receiving the Spirit of God constitutes the spiritual man.
IRENIEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, V,8,2. (SC 1 5 3 ,

p.

96)

Is it the soul, as such, that constitutes the human being? No.
That is only the soul. Is it the body, then, that is called human?
No. That is only the body. Consequently, since these two compo­
nents, separately, do not constitute a human being, it must be the
unity formed by the conjunction of both that alone deserves the
name. It is the whole person, certainly, whom God has called to
life and to resurrection, not merely a part. It is the human being,
whole and entire, who is called, that is to say, the soul, but also
the body. If that is so, how can it be conceded that one should be
saved without the other when together they form an indissoluble
union? Once the possibility of the flesh knowing a new birth has
been admitted, what an unfair discrimination it would be for the
soul to be saved without the body.
jusTIN Fragment 8 (in H. Lassiat, L'Actualite de Ia catechese
apostolique, Sisteron 1979, p. 1 7 3 )

If indeed the flesh possesses no useful function, why did Christ heal
it? And why, in particular, did he go so far as to raise the dead
to life? What was his purpose? Was it not to show us how the
resurrection was to take place? How, moreover, did he raise the
dead? Was it souls or bodies? Clearly, it was both together. If the
resurrection was to be only spiritual, he would have to have shown,
at his own resurrection, his body lying dead on one side, and his
soul on the other in its risen state. But he did nothing of the sort.
He rose with his body, convinced that the promise of life concerned
it too. Why did he rise in his crucified flesh, if not to demonstrate
the reality of the resurrection of the flesh? Wishing to convince his
disciples who were refusing to admit that he had really risen with his
body . . . he offered himself to be touched by them and showed them
the marks of the nails in his hands. But because they still could not
admit that it was he, in his own body, he asked to eat with them

Understanding the Mysteries

84