the same time 'microcosm and microtheos' (Gregory of Nyssa), syn­
thesis of the universe and offspring of God. Maximus the Confessor,
profoundly, prefers to call it 'macrocosm' (a great universe) since,
being the image of God, it exceeds even the cosmos in grandeur.
Being greater, it can take it into itself in order to give it life.
Indeed, humanity is quickened by a 'flash of the godhead', in
Gregory Nazianzen's vivid phrase, which seizes hold of it, draws
it along, will not leave it in peace, and denies it the possibility of
complete self-identification with the earth from which it was fash­
ioned. 'Man is something infinitely greater than man', said Pascal.
No earth-bound conditionings could satisfy or define humanity.
The Fathers never ceased to glorify this irreducible greatness
of humanity, this 'fathomless depth' in the human being which is
where God is. Humanity is in the image of God because, like God
himself, it escapes all definition.
An image is not truly an image if it does not possess all the
characteristics of its pattern . . . It is characteristic of divinity to
be incomprehensible: this must also be true of the image. If the
image could be essentially understood while the original remained
incomprehensible, the image would not be an image at all. But our
spiritual dimension, which is precisely that wherein we are the image
of our Creator, is beyond our ability to explain . . . by this mystery
within us we bear the imprint of the incomprehensible godhead.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On the Creation of Man, I I (PG 4 4 , I 5 5 )

I t could equally well b e said that God i s humanity's place, and
that this is more important than any facts of biology, sociology
or psychology precisely because it is the opening through which
God comes to dwell in humanity, and through which humanity
itself can ascend to God. This is the only answer to totalitarian
ideologies, that is, to 'social sciences', when they are tempted to
become all-embracing and reductionist.
Understand that you are another universe, a universe in miniature;
that in you there are sun, moon, and stars too. If it were not so,
the Lord would not have said to his disciples, 'You are the light
of the world' (Matthew 5· 14). Do you still hesitate to believe
that there are sun and moon in you when you are told that
you are the light of the world?
Do you wish to hear another text in order that you may not
regard yourself as something small and worthless . . . ?

The Human Vocation

79

This universe has its own Lord who rules it, who dwells in it
and is God Almighty, as he himself declared by the prophets, 'Do
I not fill heaven and earth?' (Jeremiah 23 .24)
Hear then what God Almighty says of you - I mean of
humanity: 'I will live in them and move among them' (2 Corinthians
6. r 6) . And he adds the following, which applies to you: 'I will be
a father to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the
Lord Almighty' (2 Corinthians 6 . 1 8 ) .
0RIGEN Fifth Homily o n Leviticus,

2

(GCS 6,3 3 6-7)

The Word of God took a lump of newly created earth, formed it
with his immortal hands into our shape, and imparted life to it: for
the spirit that he breathed into it is a flash of the invisible godhead.
Thus from clay and breath was created humanity, the image of the
Immortal . . . That is why in my earthy nature I am attached to life
here below, while I also have in me a portion of the godhead; there­
fore my heart is tormented by the desire for the world to come.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Dogmatic Poems, 8 (PG 3 7,452)

Know to what extent the Creator has honoured you above all the
rest of creation. The sky is not an image of God, nor is the moon,
nor the sun, nor the beauty of the stars, nor anything of what
can be seen in creation. You alone have been made the image
of the Reality that transcends all understanding, the likeness of
imperishable beauty, the imprint of true divinity, the recipient
of beatitude, the seal of the true light. When you turn to him
you become that which he is himself . . . There is nothing so
great among beings that it can be compared with your greatness.
God is able to measure the whole heaven with his span. The earth
and the sea are enclosed in the hollow of his hand. And although
he is so great and holds all creation in the palm of his hand,
you are able to hold him, he dwells in you and moves within
you without constraint, for he has said, 'I will live and move
among them' (2 Corinthians 6. 1 6) .
GREGORY OF NYSSA Second Homily o n the Song o f Songs (PG
44 ·7 6 5 )

This capacity for transcendence that 'distances' us from the
world, and makes us responsible for it, gives us the dignity of
kings, or more precisely priest-kings, since our sovereignty is in­
separable from offering. The image of God is revealed in us by

Understanding the Mysteries

80

our intelligence, by our vocation to express meaning, and by love,
since God is wisdom, logos, and love. These patristic conceptions
are not irrational but belong to a rationality which goes beyond the
'horizontal' connection of causes and effects, being enriched and
broadened by a 'vertical' contemplation of the mystery and meaning
of creatures and things, and their transparency to the divine logoi.
The fact of being created in the image of God means that humanity
right from the moment of creation was endowed with a royal
character . . . The godhead is wisdom and logos [reason, meaning];
in yourself too you see intelligence and thought, images of the
original intelligence and thought . . . God is love and source of
love: the divine Creator has drawn this feature on our faces too.
GREGORY OF NYSSA On the Creation of Man (PG 44, 1 3 6-7)

Thus our higher faculties reflect divine qualities, and are called
to bear fruit in 'virtues' which will be so many participations in the
divine Names, in the modes of the divine presence, The image draws
its essential power, however, from the 'principle of immortality',
which arouses within us an attraction towards what transcends us,
a 'desire for eternity'. Thereby we become greater than the universe
into which we were born and which seeks to take possession of us.
Thereby we assert our basic freedom. Ultimately, then, being in the
image of God signifies personality, freedom.
If humanity is called to life in order to share in the divine nature,
it must have been suitably constituted for the purpose . . . It was
essential that a certain kinship with the divine should have been
mixed in human nature, so that this affinity should predispose
it to seek what is related to it . . . That is why humanity was
given life, intelligence, wisdom, and all the qualities worthy of
the godhead, so that each one of them should cause it to desire
what is akin to it. And since eternity is inherent in the godhead,
it was absolutely imperative that our nature should not lack it but
should have in itself the principle of immortality. By virtue of this
inborn faculty it could always be drawn towards what is superior
to it and retain the desire for eternity.
That is summed up in a single phrase in the account of the
creation of the world: 'God created man in his own image' (Genesis
! . 27).
GREGORY OF NYSSA Catechetical Orations, 5 (PG 4 5,21-4)

The Human Vocation

81

Humanity was free from the beginning. For God i s freedom and
humanity was made in the image of God.
IREN)£US OF LYONS Against Heresies, IV,3 7,4 (SC

1 00

bis,

p.

9 3 2)