Prayer does not seek to draw God towards us since, as St
Augustine says, he is closer to us than we are to ourselves. Its
purpose is to bring us close enough to him for dialogue, and to
make us aware of his nearness. 'Lord, all is in Thee and I myself
am in Thee; do thou receive me,' says the pilgrim Macarius in
Dostoyevsky's The Adolescent.
It may be true that the divine principle is present in every
being, but not every being is present in him. We ourselves will

Approaches to Contemplation

1 82

come to dwell with him if we call on him with very holy prayers
and a tranquil mind. For his indwelling is not local, as if he
could change position . . . If we were on a ship, and to rescue
us ropes attached to a rock were thrown to us, obviously we
should not draw the rock any nearer to ourselves, but we would
pull ourselves and our ship nearer to the rock . . . And that is why
. . . in prayer we need to begin, not by drawing to ourselves that
Power that is everywhere and nowhere, but by putting ourselves in
his hands and uniting ourselves to him.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, III, 1 (PG 3,68o)

True prayer is not only of the mouth, it is of the heart, that is,
of the whole being. It is a cry de profundis, out of the deep. There
is a correspondence between the depths of the heart and the heights
of heaven, understood not in a physical sense but in the sense of a
'beyond' in relation to the centre. So it was that Pascal had recourse
to the hidden God, when the discoveries of Copernicus and Galileo
had demonstrated the emptiness of the 'infinite spaces'.
By prayer I mean not that which is only in the mouth, but
that which springs up from the bottom of the heart. In fact, just
as trees with deep roots are not shattered or uprooted by storms
. . . in the same way prayers that come from the bottom of the
heart, having their roots there, rise to heaven with complete as­
surance and are not knocked off course by the assault of any
thought. That is why the psalm says: 'Out of the deep have I
called unto thee, 0 Lord' (Psalm 130. 1 ) .
joHN CHRYSOSTOM O n the Incomprehensibility of God, Sermon 5
(PG 48,746)

Prayer upholds the virtues and is itself upheld by them. It
expresses the gratitude that arises in us in the presence of the cruci­
fied God who restores us to life. And the heart is moved with an
ontological tenderness.
Prayer is the daughter of gentleness . . .
Prayer is the fruit of joy and gratitude.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 14, 1 5 (Philokalia 1,178)

In the admirable formula that follows, Evagrius gives us the key
to the collaboration in prayer of grace and freedom. God gives

On Prayer

1 83

prayer to whoever, overcoming natural tendencies to rebelliousness
or torpor, makes it a rule to pray, and thus works together with the
deepest current of his or her being that is created in the image of
God. For the image feels the magnetic pull of its model.
If you want to pray, you need God, who gives prayer to one who
prays.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS On Prayer, 59 (Philokalia I,I B I )

Macarius develops the same theme i n a sermon. We cannot do
anything by ourselves but calls out like a child that does not yet
know how to walk and cries to attract its mother's attention. It
is not exactly salvation by faith (especially as we are taught that
faith itself is a gift: what can the human contribution be then? ) . It
is salvation by love and humility.
It is not true, as some maintain who are led astray by error,
that the human being is irremediably dead and can no longer do
anything good. A small child is incapable of anything; it cannot
run to its mother on its own legs; it tumbles on the ground, cries
out, sobs, calls out to her. And she is gentle with it, she is touched
to see her baby seeking her so impatiently with so many sobs. It
cannot reach her but cries out to her tirelessly, and she goes to
it overcome with love, she kisses it, presses it to her heart and
feeds it, with unspeakable tenderness. God loves us and he behaves
like her towards the soul that seeks him and cries out to him. In the
eagerness of that infinite love that is his . . . he takes hold of our
spirit, unites himself to it, and we become 'one spirit with him', as
the apostle says (I Corinthians 6.17). The soul is linked with the
Lord, and the Lord, full of compassion and love, unites himself to
it and it dwells in his grace. Then the soul and the Lord are one
spiritually, they form one life, one heart.
PSEUDO-MACARIUS Forty-sixth Homily, (PG 3 4,794)

Prayer and theology are inseparable. True theology is the ador­
ation offered by the intellect. The intellect clarifies the movement of
prayer, but only prayer can give it the fervour of the Spirit. Theology
is light, prayer is fire. Their union expresses the union of the intellect
and the heart. But it is the intellect that must 'repose' in the heart, and
theology must transcend it in love.

Approaches to Contemplation

1 84

If you are a theologian you will pray truly; and if you pray truly
you are a theologian.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 6r (Philokalia I, r 8 2)

When the intellect is filled with love towards God, it tears
this world of death apart, it breaks away from images, passions,
reasoning, in order to be no longer anything but gratitude and joy.
For it experiences, in this way, victory over death.
When your intellect, in an ardent love for God, sets itself gradually
to transcend, so to speak, created things and rejects all thinking . . .
at the same time filling itself with gratitude and joy, then you may
consider yourself approaching the borders of prayer.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 62 (Philokalia l, r 8 2)

Little by little, beyond its secondary forms, prayer has to make
a void that waits on God, an attentive, recollected, loving void. 'A
void where the internal straining has nothing external corresponding
to it,' says Simone Weil. Poverty. Nada of the Spanish mystics.
The 'living creatures' of Ezekiel are the four 'animals' that sym­
bolize cosmic, angelic powers. They are covered with eyes. Likewise,
the human being at prayer must become sheer listening, sheer gazing.
Then Christ comes to dwell in him and the Spirit is united with him,
to pray another sort of prayer that is no longer merely human.
To pray there is no need of gestures, nor cries, nor silence, nor
kneeling. Our prayer that is at once tranquil and fervent ought to
be a waiting upon God, for God to come and permeate all its
approaches, all its ways, all its senses. Enough of groanings and
sobs. Let us seek in our prayer only the coming of God.
When we are at work, do we not apply the whole of our body
to the task? Do not all our limbs take part in it? Likewise, let our
soul devote itself wholly to its praying and to the love of the Lord.
Do not let it be distracted or torn this way or that by thoughts. Let
it become, I say, completely a waiting upon Christ.
Then Christ will enlighten it, he will teach it true prayer, he
will endow it with . . . adoration 'in spirit and in truth' (John
4 ·24) . . .

The Lord instals himself in a fervent soul, he makes it his throne
of glory, he seats himself there and dwells there. The prophet Ezekiel

On Prayer

1 85