awake, prayer never from then on departs from his soul. Whether
he is eating or drinking or sleeping or whatever else he is doing,
even in deepest sleep, the fragrance of prayer rises without effort
in his heart. Prayer never again deserts him. At every moment
of his life, even when it appears to stop, it is secretly at work
in him continuously. One of the Fathers, the bearers of Christ,
says that prayer is the silence of the pure. For their thoughts are
divine motions. The movements of the heart and the intellect that
have been purified are the voices full of sweetness with which such
people never cease to sing in secret to the hidden God.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 85 (p. 3 47 )

Through ascetic praxis, namely the 'virtues' that are already
divine-human and clothe us with Christ, and then through perception
of the mystery of creatures and things, prayer becomes a state. A
person does not pray any more in the sense of a voluntary action
that is often difficult, he is prayer. He gives meaning and voice to the
dumb and painful prayer of created things. And prayer perfecting
the 'virtues' shines out from him in welcoming tenderness.
We go to the virtues to discover the 'principles' [Logoi] of created
beings, in sight of the Lord who gives rise to them. For his part
he is accustomed to reveal himself, once prayer has become a
state.
EvAGRJUS OF Po NTUS On Prayer, 5 2 (Philokalia I, 1 8 1 )
The human being, this traveller o n the earth, this exile, then
realizes that there is no other place than God. He makes his abode
in the unity of the Father and the Son, a unity that is the actual site
of the Holy Spirit. Already here below he is borne up by this breath of
unity, this Trinitarian fullness. He is henceforward the great celebrant
of life.
This is the moment in which we shall realize in ourselves the prayer
that our Saviour addressed to the Father for his disciples: 'That
the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them, and I
in them' (John 17.26) . . . The utter love with which 'God first
loved us' (I John 4. 10) enters our heart through the fulfilment of
this prayer of the Lord . . . And this will be the sign of it: God will
be our love and our longing, our study and our thinking. He will
be our life. The unity of the Father with the Son and of the

On Prayer

21 1

Son with the Father takes possession of our feelings and of our
mind. And in the same way that God loves us completely, we shall
be united with him by a love that will never grow less, to the point
that we shall be breathing, thinking and speaking in him.
So we shall arrive at the goal of which we spoke and which
the Lord desires for us in this prayer of his: 'That they may be one
even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may become
perfectly one' (John 17.22-23 ). 'Father I desire that they also whom
thou hast given me, may be with me where I am' (John 17.24).
Such should be our aim: to achieve, already in this life, this
breathing in unity as a foretaste of the life and the glory of heaven.
Such is the goal of perfection . . . that the whole of our life and all
the motions of our heart may become one single uninterrupted
prayer.
jOHN CASSIAN Conferences, X,7 (SC 54, p. 8 1 )

Some men o f the desert become pillars o f prayer, settled or
wandering. They reject all domestication, even that of monastic
communities, in order to opt for the untrammelled liberty of the
wild animals. 'Men of the hills' on the heights and in freedom.
The desert is much better than inhabited places for one who is
seeking the glory of God, and the mountains are indeed preferable
to cities for anyone aware of the grace that is given him.
Consider the little things. The animals of the desert are not
subject to the whip and the mountain goats are not victims of
shearers. Look at the wild ass in the desert; no one rides on
his back. Watch the roebuck in the wild; he does not lose his
freedom. Look at the stags on the rocks; they do not have to
bear the yoke. Think of the wild beasts; they do not have to have
their food doled out to them . . .
If an eagle makes its nest in a house its eyes suffer from the
smoke. If the wild ass and the roebuck come down into the plain
they are haunted by fear. If a ravening beast comes near city walls it
forfeits its skin. A stag that goes down to the valley loses its antlers.
If a mountain goat is attacked by dogs it escapes only with its fleece
in tatters . . . The splendour and the beauty of wild beasts vanish
on the plains. The strongest lions are overpowered, tamed and put
in cages. So look to the animals, 0 man of the hills, and keep away
from the dwellings of humanity. Do not relax.
EPHRAIM OF SYRIA Sermon on Monks, 3 (La my

4,1

so)

Approaches t o Contemplation

212

But the true desert is within, as Amma Syncletica remarked with
very feminine sagacity.
Amma Syncletica said, 'Many live on the mountains and behave as
if they were living amidst the uproar of a city, and they are lost.
It is possible while living amongst a crowd to be inwardly soli­
tary, and while living alone to be inwardly beset by the crowd.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Syncletica, I (SO 1 , p. 299)

Nor is the quest for the 'state of prayer' confined to anchorites.
The whole existence of a Christian can, even in its most everyday
concerns, become prayer, if hope and faith support it through all
its vicissitudes, if in its entirety it is interpreted in the light of the
cross and the resurrection. Then the human being becomes capable
of extending the liturgy into culture and society. He is able to 'offer
the Eucharist in all things', as St Paul required.
He prays unceasingly who combines prayer with necessary duties
and duties with prayer. Only in this way can we find it practicable
to fulfil the commandment to pray always. It consists in regard­
ing the whole of Christian existence as a single great prayer.
What we are accustomed to call prayer is only a part of it.
ORIGEN On Prayer, 1 2 (PG 1 1 ,4 5 2)

Prayer is continuous when the spirit clings to God with deep
emotion and great longing, and remains for ever attached to him
by faith and hope in all the actions and events of its destiny.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Asceticism, 25 (PG 90,9 3 2)

How is the fullness of God's glory achieved in each one of
us? If what I do and say is for the glory of God, my words
and deeds are full of God's glory. If my plans and undertak­
ings are for the glory of God, if my food and drink and all
my actions are for the glory of God, then it is to me also
that the words are addressed: 'The earth is full of his glory'.
ORIGEN Homilies on the Visions of Isaiah, 4,1 (PG 1 3 , 2 5 2)

2

The Glory of God Hidden
in His Creatures