At the moment of such a temptation use a short intense prayer.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS On Prayer, 98 (Philokalia 1, 1 8 5 )
O n the journey there are 'dark nights' that are not merely loss
of contact with the visible and intelligible but trials of anguish
and despair. Then it is important to fall, not into nothingness,
but at the feet of the Crucified who went down to hell. One must
identify oneself with Christ in his agony when he said not only, 'My
God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?' but also, ' Father, into
thy hands I commit my spirit'.
Trials such as these are the crucible of humility, the exodus into
the desert that is faith alone. Each of them is the introduction to a
'consolation' - that is, to a perceptible presence of the Consoler, of
the Holy Spirit - and the greater the nakedness in which one welcomes
him, the greater the consolation received.
There are three stages in the life of those who are converted:
the beginning, the middle, and perfection. At the beginning, those
converted encounter the enticements of sweetness; in the middle,
battles against temptation; at the end, the perfection of fullness.
Sweetness at first to strengthen them; then bitterness to test them;
finally the delight of the ultimate joy to establish them.
GREGORY THE GREAT Commentary on job, 20,1 1,28 (PL 76,302)

Let us not be troubled when it befalls us to be plunged into
darkness, especially if we are not responsible for it. You must
realize that this darkness enshrouding you has been given you
by God's providence for reasons known to him alone. Some­
times indeed our soul is engulfed by the waves and drowned.
Whether we give ourselves to the reading of Scripture or to prayer,
whatever we do we are increasingly imprisoned in darkness . . .
it is an hour filled with despair and fear. The soul is utterly
deprived of hope in God and the consolation of faith. It is entirely
filled with perplexity and anguish.
But those who have been tested by the distress of such an hour
know that in the end it is followed by a change. God never leaves
the soul for a whole day in such a state, for then hope would be
destroyed . . . rather he allows it to emerge very soon from the
darkness.
Blessed is he who endures such temptations . . . For, as the
Fathers say, great will be the stability and the strength to which

1 89

On Prayer

he will come after that. However, it is not in one hour or at one
stroke that such a combat is concluded. Nor is it at one moment,
but gradually, that grace comes to take up its dwelling completely
in the soul. After grace, the trial returns. There is a time for trial.
And there is a time for consolation.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 57 (Spanos, p. 2 3 2- 3 )
All the drama of the Song of Songs is there, as the mystics of
the early centuries have shown in their profound commentaries, in
particular Origen and Gregory of Nyssa. The Bridegroom approaches
and then disappears, and to find him again the Bride needs great
patience. Similarly, in the old fables the betrothed is unexpectedly left
alone and has to put on iron shoes and wear them, or weave a garment
without uttering a word, in order to find her beloved again.
Then she [the Bride in the Song of Songs] looks longingly for
the Bridegroom who has shown himself and then disappeared.
This happens often throughout the Song of Songs and can be
understood by anyone who has experienced it himself. Often, as
God is my witness, I have felt that the Bridegroom was drawing
near to me and was as close to me as possible. Then all of a sudden
he has gone away and I have not been able to find the object of my
search. Once again I have begun to desire his coming and sometimes
he returns. And when he appears to me and I am holding him with
my hands, once more he escapes me, and when he has vanished I
begin to seek him again. This happens often until I hold him truly
and arise, leaning on my beloved.
ORIGEN Sermons on the Song of Songs,

1 ,7

(SC

3 7,

r.

75)

These trials form part o f what Diadochus o f Photike calls 'edu­
cative desolation'. The divine light veils itself in order that the human
being may break free from illusion and pride, and from all masks
including that of the ascetic, and may become a pure receptacle for
the grace which is able to fashion a new creature.
Educative desolation does not in any way deprive the spirit of
the divine light. Only, grace hides its presence from the spirit in
order to make it go forward . . . to have recourse in great fear
and in great humility to God's help . . . It is like a mother who
sees her child rebel against the regular routine of feeding and
so keeps it away from her arms for a while, so that when it is

1 90

Approaches to Contemplation

frightened by the intimidating aspect of men or animals it may
return to nestle in its mother's bosom . . .
Educative desolation brings to the soul humiliation, grief and
a proper despair in order that the part of the soul that seeks glory
and is easily exalted may return to humility. But it leads the
heart immediately to the fear of God, to tears, and to a keen
desire for the beauty of silence.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 87 (SC 5 bis, p. 1 46-7)

God calls the heart and makes it exult; then he disappears; and
then he reveals himself again. By the test of renunciation and a more
lively 'feeling' of God, a person escapes gradually from the attacks of
evil: light penetrates and protects his or her nature more and more.
But God refuses to provide an overwhelming proof of his presence.
If he did he would actually be destroying the very possibility of a
meeting and the free offer of his love. God introduces the soul that
has been made holy to a rhythm of alternate enstasy and ecstasy,
of contentment and of a yearning for an irreducible otherness, so
that the soul does not cease to renew its love and spread itself in the
inexhaustible store of God's riches.
When people are baptized, grace hides her presence until the soul
makes a decision. When the whole person has turned to the Lord,
then with an unspeakable tenderness she reveals her presence to the
heart. Then once again she awaits a movement of the soul while
allowing the darts of the devil to reach even its inmost senses, in
order that the soul may seek God again with more fervour and
humility. Then if that person begins to make progress by keeping
the commandments and calling continually on the Lord jesus, the
fire of divine grace spreads also to the outward motions of the
heart. As a result the arrows of the devil fall short and hardly
scratch the vulnerable part of the soul any more. Finally when the
fighter contains all the virtues, and especially the most complete
renunciation, grace enlightens the whole person with the deepest
feeling, engendering an ardent love for God. From then on the
arrows of the devil are quenched without touching the bodily senses.
For the wind of the Spirit that is blowing within the heart destroys
the darts of the devil while they are still in flight. However, even
one who has reached this stage is sometimes abandoned by God to
the malice of the devil, and is left without any light for the spirit, so
that this freedom of ours may not be entirely shackled by bonds

On Prayer

191