The sacred theologians often describe the superessential essence in
terms of fire . . . the fire can be experienced everywhere, so to speak;
it illumines everything whilst remaining distinct from everything
. . . It shines with a total brilliance and at the same time its presence
is secret, being unknown outside of the material that is making it
visible. It is not possible to bear its brightness nor to behold it face
to face, but its power extends everywhere, and wherever it appears
it attracts everything . . . By means of this transmutation it gives
itself to anyone who approaches it, however distantly: it restores
creatures to life with its quickening warmth, it enlightens them, but
in itself it remains pure and unabsorbed . . . It is active, powerful,
everywhere present and invisible. Neglected, it seems as if it did
not exist. But as a result of the friction which is a kind of prayer it
suddenly appears, leaps up and spreads all round. One could find
more than one other property of fire that would be applicable, as
a visual image, to the operations of the divine Principle.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Celestial Hierarchy, XV, 2 (PG 3 ,
3 28-9)

Just as light which enables us to see each object does not need
any other light to be visible itself, so God who enables us to see
everything does not need a light by which we might be able to see
him, because he is light by his very essence.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Centuries, I, 3 5 (Frankenberg p. 79)

34

Understanding the Mysteries

We must now praise that perpetual Life from which all life proceeds
and by means of which every living thing according to its own
particular capacity receives life . . . Whether you are speaking of
the life of the spirit or of reason or of the senses, and what feeds
it and makes it grow, or of any other kind of life that can possibly
be, it is thanks to the Life that trancends all life that it lives and
communicates life . . . Indeed, it is not enough to say that this
Life is alive. It is the very principle of life, and its sole source.
It is that which perfects and differentiates all life, and its praises
should be sung by all life . . . Bestower of life and more than life,
it deserves to be honoured with every name that human beings can
apply to this inexpressible Life.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, VI,

1

&

3

(PG ) , 8 5 6-7)

God is Love. Whoever sought to define him would be like a blind
person trying to count the grains of sand on the sea shore.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 3 oth step, 2(6),
p. 1 67.

3

The God-Man

One of the most beautiful liturgies of the ancient Church, largely the
work of St Basil of Ca:sarea, recalls the history of salvation thus:
Thou hast visited [humanity] in many ways, in the loving-kindness
of thy heart: thou hast sent the prophets, thou hast worked mighty
wonders through the saints who, from generation to generation,
were close to thee . . . Thou hast given us the help of the Law.
Thou hast charged angels to watch over us. And when the fullness
of time was come, thou didst speak to us by thine own Son . . .
There is no culture or religion that has not received and does
not express a 'visitation of the Word'. Maxim us the Confessor
distinguishes three degrees in the 'embodiment' of the Word. In
the first place, the very existence of the cosmos, understood as a
theophany; this symbolism is the foundation of the ancient religions,
which see in it the means to the deepest spiritual understanding. Sec­
ondly, the revelation of the personal God, who engendered history,
and the embodying of the Word in the Law, in a sacred Scripture;
Judaism and Islam are obvious examples. Finally, the personal in­
carnation of the Word who gives full meaning to his cosmic and
scriptural embodiments, freeing the former from the temptation to
absorb the divine 'Self ' in an impersonal divine essence, and the
latter from the temptation to separate God and humanity, leaving
no possibility of communion between them. For in Christ, to quote
the Fourth Ecumenical Council, God and man are united 'without
confusion or change', but also 'without division or separation'. And
the divine energies, reflected by creatures and objects, do not lead to
anonymous divinity but to the face of the transfigured Christ.

36

Understanding the Mysteries

The Word is concentrated and takes bodily form.
That can be first understood in this sense . . . that by coming
in the flesh he deigned to concentrate himself in order to assume a
body and teach us in our human tongue, and by means of parables,
the knowledge of holy and hidden things, which surpasses all
language . . .
It can also be understood to mean that for love of us he hides
himself mysteriously in the spiritual essences of created beings, as
if in so many individual letters [of the alphabet], present totally in
each one in all his fullness . . . In all the variety is hidden the one
who is eternally the same, in composite things the one who is simple
and without parts, in those things which had to begin on a certain
day the one who has no beginning, in the visible the one who is
invisible, in the tangible the one who cannot be touched . . .
It can finally be understood to mean that for love of us who
are slow to comprehend, he has deigned to use these letters to
express the syllables and sounds of Scripture, in order to draw us
after him and unite us in spirit.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 1 , 1 28 5-8)

Jesus reveals in its fullness the mystery of the living God.
There is only one God,
revealed by Jesus Christ his Son
who is his Word sprung from the silence . . .
IGNATIUS OF ANTIOCH Letter to the Magnesians, 8,2 (SC 10, p. 102)

God, in Christ, comes to seek for humankind, the 'lost sheep'
of the parable in the Gospel, even in the 'depths of the earth',
which denotes a finiteness that has become impenetrable and re­
calcitrant, buried in nothingness.
The Lord has given us a sign 'as deep as Sheol and as high as
heaven', such as we should not have dared to hope for. How
could we have expected to see a virgin with child, and to see in
this Child a 'God with us' (Isaiah 7 . I I & 14) who would descend
into the depths of the earth to seek for the lost sheep, meaning the
creature he had fashioned, and then ascend again to present to his
Father this 'man' [humanity] thus regained?
IRENIEUS OF LYONS Against Heresies, III, 19,3 (SC 2 1 1 , p. 3 8o)

The God-Man

37

A Jewish-Christian text of the second century, attributed to
Solomon in accordance with a practice common at that time in the
Jewish world, admirably expresses the kenosis of the incarnate and
crucified God. The word kenosis comes from the verb ekenosen, used
by Paul in the Epistle to the Philippians: 'Christ Jesus . . . heauton
ekenosen' that is, stripped, humbled, emptied himself - 'taking the
form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men' ( Philippians
2.7). Jesus reveals to us the human face of God, a God who, in the
foolishness of love, 'empties himself ' so that I may accept him in all
freedom and that I may find room for my freedom in him.
-