Church' (Amour sans Limites, Chevetogne 1 9 7 1 , p. 1 8 ) completes
his self-revelation on the cross. God is not j ust. He is infinitely more
than j ust. He is the foolishness of love that never ceases coming
down into our hell to raise us up again. Each one of us is the
labourer of the eleventh hour of whom nothing else is asked but
a cry of trust and hope. The only sin, in fact, is 'not to under­
stand the grace of the resurrection'. ' If I had committed all possible
crimes, I should feel that this multitude of offences would be like
a drop of water in a blazing furnace', said St Therese of the Child
Jesus, taking up, without being aware of it, almost word for word
the expressions of St Isaac. That is why the Christian message,
today more than ever among so much scepticism, can only be the
proclamation and witness of Christ's victory over death and hell.
As is a grain of sand weighed against a large amount of gold,
so, in God, is the demand for equitable judgment weighed against
his compassion. As a handful of sand in the boundless ocean, so
are the sins of the flesh in comparison with God's providence
and mercy. As a copious spring could not be stopped up with a
handful of dust, so the Creator's compassion cannot be conquered
by the wickedness of creatures.
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, sB (p. 23 5-6)

Do not say that God is just . . . David may call him just and fair,
but God's own Son has revealed to us that he is before all things
good and kind. He is kind to the ungrateful and the wicked (Luke
6. 3 5) . How can you call God just when you read the parable of
the labourers in the vineyard and their wages? 'Friend, I am doing
you no wrong . . . I choose to give to this last as I give to you . . .
do you begrudge my generosity?' (Matthew 20. 1 3 ). Likewise how
can you call God just when you read the parable of the prodigal
son who squanders his father's wealth in riotous living, and the
moment he displays some nostalgia his father runs to him, throws
his arms round his neck and gives him complete power over all his
riches? It is not someone else who has told us this about God, so
that we might have doubts. It is his own Son himself. He bore this
witness to God. Where is God's justice? Here, in the fact that we
were sinners and Christ died for us . . .
0 the wonder of the grace of our Creator! 0 the unfathomable
goodness with which he has invested the existence of us sinners
in order to create it afresh! . . . Anyone who has offended and
blasphemed him he raises up again . . . Sin is to fail to understand

The Difficult Love

30 7

the grace of the resurrection. Where is the hell that could afflict us?
Where is the damnation that could make us afraid to the extent
of overwhelming the joy of God's love? What is hell, face to face
with the grace of the resurrection when he will rescue us from
damnation, enable this corruptible body to put on incorruption
and raise up fallen humanity from hell to glory? . . . Who will
appreciate the wonder of our Creator's grace as it deserves? . . . In
place of what sinners justly deserve, he gives them resurrection.
In place of the bodies that have profaned his law, he clothes them
anew in glory . . . See, Lord, I can no longer keep silent before the
ocean of thy grace. I no longer have any idea how to express the
gratitude that I owe to thee . . . Glory be to thee in both the worlds
that thou hast created for our growth and delight, guiding us by
the path of thy majestic works to the knowledge of thy glory!
ISAAC OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 6o (p. 24 5-6)

The spirituality that I have tried to present in this book is a
spirituality of resurrection. And resurrection begins here and now.
It is life in its fullness, life able finally to absorb, reverse and pass
beyond death. Zhivago, to the question, 'Are there things in the world
that claim our fidelity? ' answers, 'Very few. We ought, I think, to be
faithful to immortality, which is another name, a richer name, for
life. We should be faithful to immortality, faithful to Christ.' Why to
Christ? Because once upon a time there was 'a maiden who in silence
and in secret gave life to a child and gave the world life, the miracle
of life, the life of all things, " Him who is life " as he was to be called
later.' ( Boris Pasternak, Doctor Zhivago. )
Christ is risen from the dead,
Trampling down death by death,
And upon those in the tombs bestowing life.
Troparion, refrain, in the Easter Liturgy of the Byzantine rite.

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES

AMBROSE O F MILAN (c. 3 34 - 397)

Of all the Latin Fathers, Ambrose is without doubt the one whose
thought is most harmoniously balanced. He combined the virtues of
a Roman statesman with a deep faith, and a knowledge of Greek
theology with the pastoral and moral sense of Latin Christianity.
Born at Trier into a patrician family (his father who died at an
early age was Praetorian Prefect for Gaul), Ambrose studied law and
rhetoric at Rome and then became Governor of Liguria and Emilia,
with his seat at Milan. After the death of that city's bishop, while he
himself was only a catechumen, he went to the cathedral to mediate
between Arians and the upholders of the dogma of Nicaea (see note
on Arianism. The Council of Nicaea was held in 3 2 5 A.D. and defined
the relation between Christ and the Father as 'consubstantial'). All of
them thereupon agreed in acclaiming him bishop. He fled. But he was
brought back and was baptized and consecrated bishop (7 December
3 74). He distributed his fortune to the poor, whose defender he be­
came thenceforward. He deepened his philosophical and theological
knowledge, and preached indefatigably. (The part he played in the
conversion of St Augustine is well known. ) He asserted the spiritual
independence of the Church against the State - 'the Emperor is in
the Church and not above it' - he frustrated an attempt at pagan
restoration at Rome; he contributed peacefully to the disappearance
of Arianism on both coasts of the Adriatic; he counselled princes; and
in 3 90 he obliged the Emperor Theodosius to do public penance for
having suppressed a riot at Thessalonica by a massacre.
Very conscious of his responsibility as a privileged witness to the
faith, Ambrose, from the time that he was consecrated, gave himself
to study under the direction of a learned priest, Simplicius, who was

310

Biographical Notes