of grace . . . for the human being ought to be able still to make
progress in the spiritual life. For what we regard as perfection is
still imperfect in the presence of the richness of God, this God who
with all the eagerness of his love longs to be our teacher.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 8 5 (SC 5 bis, p. 144-5)

The more the Inaccessible shares with us, the more inaccessible
he shows himself to be. By reminding us of the distance between
him and us he keeps us from idolizing the mystical state. It is a
spirituality not of fusion or commixture but of communion, in
which the Other remains the more unknown the more he makes
himself known. This is the way into a living eternity where progress
in love never comes to an end.
When the soul at the call of its beloved goes out to look for him
whom no name can reach, it learns . . . that it is enamoured of one
who is inaccessible, and is desirous of one who cannot be grasped.
These words strike the soul and wound it with despair, because it
believes its search for fullness will never come to an end . . . But
the veil of its sadness is taken away from it when it is taught that to
go forward continually in its search, and never to cease raising its
sights, constitutes the true enjoyment of what it desires. Each time
its desire is fulfilled the desire for higher realities is engendered.
So when the veil of its despair has been taken away, and it has
seen that the invisible and infinite beauty of him whom it loves is
shown to increase in beauty to all eternity, it is animated by a still
stronger longing for its beloved and opens to him . . . the state of
its heart, saying that, after having been smitten with God's shaft,
it has been wounded to the heart by the point of faith and has been
mortally wounded by love. Now according to John, love is God.
To him be glory and power for ever and ever.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Sermons on the Song of Songs, 12 (PG 44,
103 6-?)

3 · Times and postures for prayer

In the following very ancient text, the sanctification of time is related
to the principal moments of the Passion and Easter. It thereby
gives a new meaning to cosmic praise. The cross and the resur­
rection have inaugurated the 'last times', marked by the reversal of

1 92

Approaches to Contemplation

the symbolism usually ascribed to day and night. The day, despite
its proud self-sufficient brightness, is connected henceforward with
Christ's suffering and death - midday becomes darkness. The evening
sees the dawn of the spirit appear with the sacramental water and
blood that flow from the side of the Crucified. The night is filled
with paschal light, 'the poles are reversed', and the dawn, coming
with cock-crow, looks forward to the breaking of the day with no
sunset, the day of the Kingdom.
We should notice also, in this apostolic period when it was not
yet necessary to be a monk to be fully Christian, as people in later
Christian centuries came to believe, the assurance that married life
even in its sexual expression is not in any way opposed to the spiritual
life, but can be organized to promote it.
Let us notice finally the profound conception, well attested
in the ancient Church, according to which at certain times, and
especially in the dead of night which is the moment of resurrec­
tion, the whole cosmos becomes Church - stars, plants and animals
gather together in a sort of prayer.
If you are at home pray at the third hour [nine o'clock] and praise
God. If you are elsewhere at that moment praise God in your heart,
for at that hour Christ was nailed to the Cross . . . You will pray
likewise at the sixth hour [midday] remembering Christ hanging
on the cross while . . . the darkness reigned. At that hour you
will offer a very fervent prayer to imitate him who prayed for
his executioners when the universe was plunged in darkness. At the
ninth hour [three o'clock in the afternoon] resume your prayer and
praise . . . At that hour Christ, his side pierced, poured out water
and blood. He illumined the declining daylight until evening and
offered a symbol of the resurrection with the return of the light.
Pray also before your body goes to sleep.
Towards the middle of the night get up, wash your hands in
water, and pray. If your wife is there, pray together. If she is not
yet a Christian, withdraw into another room to pray, then go back
to bed.
Do not be negligent over your prayer. One who is married
is in no way defiled. 'He who has bathed does not need to wash
. . . but he is clean all over' (John I 3 .IO). If you make the sign of
the cross with your moist breath your body will be clean all over,
right down to your feet. For the gift of the Spirit and the water of
baptism, flowing as from a spring, have cleansed the believer, if he
has received them with a heart full of faith.

1 93

On Prayer

We have to pray at this hour because the men of old from whom
we have received this tradition have taught us that all creation rests
then for a moment in order to praise the Lord. The stars, the trees,
the rivers stop for an instant and, together with the choir of angels
and the souls of the righteous, sing the praises of God. And so
praying at this hour ought to be precious to the faithful.
The Lord himself bears witness to that when he says: ' Behold,
the bridegroom! Come out to meet him' (Matthew 25 .6). And at
the end: 'Watch therefore, for y0u know neither the day nor the
hour' (Matthew 25 . 1 3 ). Towards cock-crow get up again and pray
in the same way . . . We are looking for the day of the resurrection
of the dead in hope of eternal light.
Apostolic Tradition, 3 5 (Botte,

p.

69)

A Christian, if he cannot pray in the dead of night, should try, by
means of the attitude we have described, to let Christ's presence per­
meate his sleep while creation keeps watch in the clear angelic light.

Evening Hymn

We bless thee now, 0 my Christ, thou Word of God,
Light of Light without beginning, Bestower of the Spirit.
We bless thee, threefold light of undivided glory.
Thou hast vanquished the darkness and brought forth the light,
to create everything in it.
Thou hast given solidity to matter,
moulding the face of the world
and the shape of its beauty therein.
Thou hast enlightened the human spirit,
endowing it with reasoning and wisdom.
Everywhere is to be found the reflection of eternal light,
so that in the light the human spirit
may find its splendour and become entirely light.
Thou hast illumined the sky with spangled lights.
The night and the day thou hast commanded to alternate in peace
by giving them, for rule, brotherly love.
Night puts an end to the body's toil,
Day awakens us again to our work,

1 94

Approaches to Contemplation

to our business that engrosses us.
But we are fleeing the darkness,
we are hastening to the day that never wanes,
to the day that will never know the sorrow of the dusk.
Grant to mine eyelids a light sleep,
that my voice remain not long dumb.
Thy creation shall keep watch to sing psalms with the angels.
May my sleep be ever peopled by thy presence . . .
Even parted from the body my spirit sings thy praise
0 Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
To thee be glory and power
for ever and ever.
Amen.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Dogmatic Poems (PG 3 7,3 1 1-14)