Keep my secret, you who are kept by it.
Keep my faith, you who are kept by it.
Learn what I know, you whom my truth has known.
Love me with love, you whom I have loved.
Pray without ceasing, dwell in the love of the Lord,
you who are loved in the Well-beloved,
you who are living in the Living one,
saved by him who has redeemed you.
So will you escape from death, throughout all ages,
in the name of your Father. Alleluia!
Odes of Solomon, 8 (Harris-Mingana, pp. 254-5)

And this exchange of love if we do not want it to be illusory
must be confirmed by an infallible test, brotherly love.
Two men who wanted to see the sunrise would be very foolish
to argue about the place where it will appear and their means of
looking at it, then to let their argument degenerate into a quarrel,
from that to come to blows and in the heat of the conflict to gouge
out each other's eyes. There would no longer be any question then
of contemplating the dawn . . .
Let us who wish to contemplate God purify our hearts by faith
and heal them by means of peace; for the effort we make to love one
another is already a gift from him to whom we raise our eyes.
AUGUSTINE OF HIPPO Sermons, 2 3 , 1 8 (PL 3 8, 1 62)

Ascetic tenacity, even if it is not masochism or lust for self­
destruction, runs the risk of being an extreme example of the will
to power and possession - Lucifer's own special temptation. Ascesis
then becomes the most dangerous of idols. That is why God expects
from us, basically, love and humility.
An elder replied, 'I tell you, many have ruined their bodies with
no discernment and gone away without finding anything. We may
have evil-smelling breath because of our fasting, we may know the
Scriptures by heart, we may recite all the psalms . . . and still lack
what God is looking for - love and humility.
Anonymous Sayings of the Desert Fathers, 90 (SO I, P. 3 57)

The mixture of sin and humility is worth more than the mixture
of virtue and pride. The God of the Pharisee in the Gospel, and of all
like him, is no doubt only his good conscience. The humility of the

1 54

Initiation for Warfare

publican, the man doubly excluded, for political and for religious
reasons, truly makes room for the divine. 'I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners,' Christ said.
Imagine two chariots. Harness virtue and pride to one, sin and
humility to the other. You will see the chariot drawn by sin
outstrip that of virtue . . . To understand why one of these vehicles
is faster than the other, remember the Pharisee and the publican
. . . One relied on his own righteousness, on his own fasting and
the tithes that he paid. The other needed to say only a few words
to be free of all his sins. That was because God was not only
listening to his words, he also saw the soul of him who spoke
them, and finding it humble and contrite he judged him worthy
of his compassion and love . . .
That is precisely what Christ wanted to demonstrate when he
said: 'Corne to me, all who labour and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest' (Matthew 1 1 .28). So it is that he calls to us; let us
not keep our distance. If our sins are countless that is all the more
reason for going to him, for we are the sort of person he is calling. In
fact he says: 'I carne not to call the righteous, but sinners' (Matthew
9. 1 3 ) . . . He is called the God of consolation, of mercy, because
unceasingly he consoles and encourages the unfortunate ones and
the afflicted, even if they have committed thousands of sins.
Let us then be content to surrender and go to him and never
to leave him.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM On the Incomprehensibility of God, 5 (PG 48,
74 5)

God himself is humble because he is love. God humbled himself
out of love. Therefore not only does humility open us to God: it
clothes us with Christ, the humbled God.
Humility is the ornament of the godhead. The Word clothed
himself in it when he became man. By it he lived among us in
the flesh . . . And anyone who wraps himself in it truly makes
himself like him who carne down from on high and clothed his
grandeur and glory in humility, lest the created world should
dissolve at the sight of him. Indeed, the created world would not
have been able to contemplate him if he had not taken it to himself
and in this way lived within it.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 20 (p. 76)

Confidence and Humility

1 55

The Lord who went down to hell, now, the moment I call to
him, comes to seek me in the midst of the darkness in which I am
struggling.
It was not said: I have fasted, I have kept awake, I have slept
on the hard ground. Rather it was said: I have humbled myself and
at once the Lord has saved me.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 2 5 th Step, 14 (p. I I 8 )
Ascesis ought to make a person ready to welcome this coming
to him of Another, a wholly undeserved coming, one which no ascesis
will ever earn.
'
I have seen some of them, sick in soul and body, haunted by
their sins, engaging in contests beyond their strength . . . To them
I say, God judges our metanoia not by our efforts but by our
humility.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 26th Step, 2nd part,
9 ( r o B ) p. 1 3 8

The ultimate sin is to despair of God's mercy. That is to limit
it, to make our ego its limit, whereas it is boundless.
The mercy of God has no limits, nothing is too great for it.
That is the reason why anyone who despairs of it is the author of
his own death.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 5th Step, 23 (46)
p. 5 8

Trust, childlike trust, enables the power o f the resurrection to
dwell in us. For the God who was made man never ceases to be with
us.
smallest of human creatures, do you want to find life?
Preserve in yourself faith and humility and . . . in them you will
find the one who protects you and dwells secretly with you . . .
When you come before God in prayer, be in your thought like
an ant, like something crawling on the ground, like a child lisping.
And in his presence make no pretence of knowledge. Approach God
rather with the heart of a child. Go into his presence to receive the
0

1 56

Initiation for Warfare