and thoughts that are besieging it and leads it to love and to the
achievement of spiritual power.
EvAGRJUS OF PONTUS On Prayer, 63 (Philokalia I, 1 B 2)
Clearly it is not only a question of discerning between good
and bad thoughts, but also of escaping from the flux of our psychic
processes in which so often 'something thinks', 'something speaks' in
spite of us. The spirit soars up to God beyond the visible and the intel­
ligible, up even beyond its own flight - pure ek-stasis of the person
up to the personal God. Then we can say with the bride of the Song
of Songs: ' I slept, but my heart was awake' (Song of Songs 5 .2).
A woman who is asleep can remain impervious to the uproar of a
storm, but will be woken by a sigh from her baby in the next room. A
sleeper who is indifferent to the noises in the street immediately hears
the light footsteps of the one he loves. Lighter still are the footsteps
of the 'One who comes'. But the heart wakes for him.
When the spirit wants to think, it goes down beneath itself and
plunges into thoughts one at a time. For the thoughts are below
the thinker, precisely because they are being thought and are
thus limited. They constitute a scattering, a dismemberment of
the spirit. For the spirit is simple, without division. Thoughts
on the other hand are innumerable and scattered, the units, so
to speak, of which the spirit is made . . . But the spirit is united by
the movement by which it raises itself up to that which is above it,
namely when it devotes itself to the contemplation of God, when
in ecstasy it is transported beyond the visible and the natural and
even beyond its own movement.
jOHN OF ScYTHOPOLIS On the Divine Names of Dionysius the
A reopagite, 7 (PG 4 , 3 44 )

In ordinary sleep the sleeper is not awake, and the one who is
awake is not asleep, but both sleeping and wakefulness succeed
each other alternately, taking each other's place . . . But here we find
an unheard of and paradoxical union and mixture of contraries. For
the Bride says: ' I slept, but my heart was awake' (Song of Songs 5 .2).
What can these words mean? Sleep resembles death. For in sleep all
visible aCtivity of the body comes to a halt . . . The body is entirely
relaxed. It also induces forgetfulness of those preoccupations that
a person carries about with him, it puts fear to sleep, it pacifies
anger, it soothes bitterness and makes us insensible to all pain.

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

1 73

We see from this how high the soul rises above itself when it
says: ' I sleep but my heart is awake' . . . Enjoying the contemplation
solely of that which is . . . but allowing all bodily activity to sleep,
it receives in the unclothed nakedness of the spirit the revela­
tion of God in divine wakefulness. May we make ourselves also
worthy of it, by attaining through sleep to wakefulness of soul.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Sermons on the Song of Songs, 10 (PG 44,
99 2-3 )
Having reached interior freedom, where the 'passions' cease, or
are transformed into love, and participate in God's p ure 'passion of
love', we let the light of God transfix us. In this light, whose source
is utterly elsewhere, we then see, beyond the stirring of 'thoughts',
our heart-spirit as an interior heaven, sapphire in colour. It is an
abyss of light or, better, of transparent glory, inwardly azure, as a
sign that the world is becoming interior to the spiritual person. To
descend into the heart, say the ascetics, is thereafter to climb Sinai,
where God revealed himself to Moses.
If you wish to see the transparency of you own spirit you must rid
yourself of all thoughts, and then you will see yourself looking like
sapphire or the colour of heaven. But to do that without interior
freedom [apatheia] is not possible. Human beings need God's help
in filling their emptiness with light and strength.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Centuries, Suppl. 2 (Frankenberg p. 425)
Anger (where the strength of the soul, the thumos, is inflamed
and distorted) and greed (where desire, the epithumia, is inflamed and
distorted) are major passions to be overcome, major energies to be
transformed.
If you are armed against anger you will never allow greed to master
you. For it is greed that fuels anger, and anger that blurs the eye of
the spirit, so wrecking the state of prayerfulness.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS On Prayer, 27 (Philokalia 1,17 9 )
To come before God in prayer is to see oneself in his clear
and sober light with the eyes of a child. So one feels oneself being
weighed and judged, and this leads to self-judgement, and any resent­
ment fades away like something laughable.
And how can one pray, or escape from the demon of sadness,
if one has wounded a brother or sister in anger?

1 74

Initiation for Warfare

If you receive some provocation or contradiction that irritates you,
and you feel your anger leading you to reply in kind and retaliate,
then remember prayer and the judgment that is awaiting you, and
at once your unruly emotion will subside.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS On Prayer, 1 2 (Philokalia 1,178)

It is a question not only of preserving one's calm outwardly since resentment is worse than an outburst of anger - but also of
allowing the Holy Spirit to pacify the soul.
The Holy Spirit calms the soul. Anger rouses the heart. Nothing is
so opposed as anger to the coming of the Holy Spirit to us.
jo HN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 8th Step, 1 6( 1 8 )
(p. 71)

I have seen people preserving a calm exterior . . . while beneath
an appearance of quiet they are nourishing internal resentment. I
regard them as more pitiable than those who give vent to their feel­
ings. Their dreary character puts the Dove, the Holy Spirit, to flight.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 8th Step, 1 7 ( 20)
( p. 7 1 )

Then we come t o the gentleness o f those who are strong, whether
they are in the desert or amongst other people.
Better a man living in the world if he is gentle than a monk who
flies into fits of anger.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Mirror of Monks, 3 4 (Gressmann, p. I 56)

However, it is not a question of abolishing aggressiveness, of
unmanning anyone, of assuming an attitude of nihilistic indiffer­
ence. There can be a good use for aggressiveness when we use it
calmly against hatred and stupidity.
Anger, more than the other passions, is wont to trouble and
upset the soul. But even anger sometimes renders the soul great
benefits. When, in fact, we use it calmly against error or stupidity,
to denounce and save, we obtain for the soul additional gentleness,
since we are furthering the purposes of justice and divine goodness.
And also when we rouse ourselves strongly against evil we often
make more masculine what is feminine in the soul . . . Therefore

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

1 75

one who makes temperate use of anger out of zeal for truth will
no doubt be found better, in the time of judgement, than one who
out of inertia was never stirred to anger.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 62 (SC 5 bis, p. 1 2 1 )