They asked him for a 'word'. ' How can I give you a word,' replied
Sisoes, 'when I have not yet myself begun to repent? ' Truly, that was
the word.
Abba Pambo delivers the same message to us in the following
brief narrative.
It is related that at the hour of his death Abba Pambo said to
the monks around him, 'Ever since I arrived here and built
myself a cell in which I have lived, I do not remember ever
having eaten bread that I have not earned with my own hands,
or having uttered a word that I have had to regret. Yet I go to
the Lord as someone who has not even begun to serve God.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Pambo, 8 (PG 6 5 , 3 69)

Humility makes forgiveness possible and is identified with it, or
at least with silence when an injury has been received.
A brother asked one of the elders for a definition of humility
and he replied, 'It is to pardon our brother who has wronged us
before he himself asks our pardon.'
One of the elders was asked by a brother, 'What is humility?'
and he answered, 'It is to do good to those who do evil to
us.' The brother put a further question, 'If one cannot go as
far as that, what should one do?' The elder replied, 'Flee those
who offend us and keep silent.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Anonymous series, 1 7 1
p. 3 8 2)

&

1 7 3 (SO

1,

But we must not be content with words, or with too much talk
a bout love. Humility should be practical and realistic.
A brother went to see Abba Matoes and said to him, 'How were
the solitaries of Scete able to do more than Scripture requires, by
loving their enemies more than themselves?'
Abba Matoes answered him, 'For my part I do not yet love
the one who loves me, as much as I love myself.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Matoes, 5 (PG 65,292)

Humility is closely connected with interior silence. Any obsession
with guilt must be rejected but we must be able to keep silence and say
nothing in the face of insults, as Jesus did. We remember his silence
before Pilate. The loving power of that silence has been portrayed
by Dostoyevsky in The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor.

160

Initiation for Warfare

A brother asked Abba Bessarion, 'What am I to do?' The answer:
'Keep silence and do not judge yourself.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Bessarion, 10 (PG 6 5 , 1 4 1 )

I do not pray any longer not to sin, but for thirty years I have been
repeating, 'Lord jesus, shield me from my tongue.' Yet despite this
my tongue trips me up every day, and I commit sin because of
it.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Sisoes, 5 (PG 6 5,3 9 3 )

Abba Agathon carried pebbles in his mouth for three years, not to
become an orator but to learn to keep silence.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Agathon, 1 5 (PG 65,u 3 )

I f someone accuses you of something you have done, or not done,
and you keep silent, this is in conformity with the nature of
jesus.
If you answer: 'But what have I done?' that is not according
to his nature.
If you answer back word for word, that is contrary to his
nature.
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Abba Isaiah, Logos 2 5 , 5 1 (CSCO 294,
p. 4 3 8 )

Silence is receptivity. It makes us attentive a n d allows a conver­
sation with God that goes beyond words.
The friend of silence comes close to God.
In secret he converses with him and receives his light.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 1 1th Step 4 ( 5 )
(p. 78)

Humility and silence are s o many aspects o f interior poverty
and renunciation. A person uprooted from a settled life, heads for
the desert, to become God's nomad. The real desert is within us. A
vast city can be a strange kind of desert.
Spiritual deepening necessarily passes through 'mindfulness of
death'. This 'mindfulness' is a 'reminder', an anamnesis in the strictest
sense of the word, something not intellectual but existential. Our
whole being is shaken and we experience the anguish and bitterness
of our narrow finiteness, the condition of alienation, error, horror,

161

Confidence and Humility

hatred of others and of self. Everything seems precarious and about to
overwhelm us, physical death seems imminent, and we feel the threat,
already partially experienced, of spiritual death - this is real agony.
Then we discover, nearer still, the Christ who is conqueror of
death and hell. And the 'mindfulness of death' becomes a blessed
'mindfulness of God', of God who is incarnate, crucified, bound
with the chains of hell, risen. And all of a sudden there is no longer
anything but resurrection. The anguish is changed into trust and
the bitterness into sweetness.
The 'mindfulness of death' in spite of appearances does not come
automatically. It has to be asked for and received as a grace.
An elder said: 'The man who keeps the image of death continually
before his eyes will always overcome his faint-heartedness.'
Sayings of the Desert Fathers (in

T.

Merton, p. I I 3 )

Perfect awareness of death is free of all anguish.
jOHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 6th Step, I 6 (p. 6o)
Mindfulness of death gives to the soul's activity something
incorruptible.
jOHN CuMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 6th Step, 2I (p. 6 I )
Mindfulness of death is a grace added to the other gifts that God
gives us. If it were not so, why should we often stand by tombs
without feeling the least emotion, whereas our heart can be deeply
moved when we are far from the sight of them?
jOHN CuMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 6th Step, 22 (p. 6 I )
It is impossible to spend the coming day in faith i f we do not think
of it as the last day of our life.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 6th Step, 26 (p. 62)
The 'mindfulness of death' should be linked with the Name of
Jesus, the name of death's conqueror. Then I know at once what
I am saved from and by whom. And if go to sleep each night like
this, I introduce into my sleep, which is at once an image of death
and also a kind of self-abandonment, a tang of the resurrection. The
name of Jesus shuts up the infernal depths from which illusions come
into the soul; and it opens the soul to the 'superconscious', which is
penetrated by baptismal grace and visited by bright dreams.

162

Initiation for Warfare