to the contemplative life. None the less the young man, the son of a
famous orator, attended the best schools including the university of
Athens, where he became a friend of Gregory Nazianzen. He drew
on the scientific knowledge of his time in his Hexameron, studies on
the creation of the world. He also wrote a small treatise, To Young
People, on how to profit from pagan literature. And so, without
denying the culture he had gained, he was attracted, about 3 s 6, by
the immense monastic movement of those days and he travelled in
quest of exemplars and spiritual masters in the 'deserts' of Syria,
Mesopotamia and Egypt. On his return to Cappadocia he settled
in solitude, and with his friend Gregory wrote his first Philokalia, an
anthology of spiritual texts from Origen. In 3 64 he began to draw
up the monastic rules on which he never ceased to work. They treat
less of ascetic feats and charismatic exaltation than of a return to the
apostolic life of the first Christian community - a common life of true
'Christians' with no other designation, founded on charity, attention
to others, work, social service, prayer and meditation on Scripture.
From 3 6 2 onwards the Church imposed unforeseen responsibilities
on Basil. He was made priest, his bishop's auxiliary, then himself
bishop of Caesarea, and in 3 70 metropolitan of Cappadocia.
He had to deal with a twofold crisis, social and spiritual, which
led him to confront the civil authorities with consummate firmness.
A more or less totalitarian state was crushing a society in which
contrasts were exacerbated. In his speeches and his various inter­
ventions, Basil insisted on the equal dignity of all people and on the
limits of private property. Near Caesarea he organized a complete
city of social service run by monks. The people gave it the name
' Basiliad'. It contained a guest house, a hospice, a hospital, and there
were free meals and lodging for the poorest workers. At the same
time he increased the number of monastic communities as centres of
fellowship. He developed liturgical life - the Eucharistic liturgy 'of St
Basil' is still in use today in the Orthodox Church - and his spiritual
texts, beneath a Stoic dress, a.re deeply evangelical and Pauline: ' It
is not you who by your virtue have laid hold of Christ, but Christ
who has laid hold of you by his coming' (Homily 2). And all the
ascesis has as its magnetic attraction the beauty of Christ. ' Ineffable
is the beauty of the Word . . . the form of God in his appearance.
Blessed are those who with all their longing contemplate the true
beauty!' (Homily on Psalm 44).
St Basil contributed powerfully to overcoming the Arian crisis.
He attacked the Eunomians vigorously for pretending that human
reason can know God completely. Basil emphasized that God is

Biographical Notes

317

ineffable, inaccessible, knowable only in h i s 'energies'. On the other
hand he showed himself tolerant towards those who baulked at the
homoousion, without calling into question the divinity of Christ. He
admitted them to communion and gradually won them over. When
the Pneumatomachi denied the divinity of the Spirit, he showed its
necessity without explicitly asserting it in his Treatise on the Holy
Spirit. He was delicate in health, worn out by ascesis and hardship,
and died prematurely in his fifties. But he had opened the way for
the Second Ecumenical Council that in 3 8 1 proclaimed the divinity
of the Spirit 'the Giver of Life'.
On the Holy Spirit SC 1 7 bis; Longer Rules PG 3 1 , 8 89- 1 0 5 2; Short
Ascetic Instruction PG 3 1 ,620-5

BENEDICT O F NURSIA (480 - 547)

The life of St Benedict is known from the Dialogues of St Gregory,
written about forty years after Benedict's death and based, for all
their abundance of miracles, on the memories of actual witnesses.
Benedict was born in 480 near Nursia in Central Italy into a
family of the lesser nobility. He was sent to Rome to study rhetoric
and law, but took flight without warning to the 'desert' of Subiaco,
where he lived for a long time in complete solitude. Disciples then
came to him and prevailed upon him to found a dozen small mon­
asteries of the Pachomian type, each with its own superior, Benedict
reserving to himself the formation of the novices. Twenty years passed
in this way. Then opposition on the part of the local clergy, perhaps
also of his monks, caused Benedict to withdraw once again. He
founded accordingly a completely communitarian monastery on the
top of Monte Cassino. He evangelized the surrounding countryside,
and directed a community of nuns that was governed by his sister,
Scholastica. In Gregory's account of him he appears as endowed
with the spiritual gift of healing and as a mystic who had a vision
of the whole universe gathered together in a ray of divine light. He
died about 5 47, after having completed his Rule, which was adopted
during the sixth century by all the West and was to make him the
father of the monks of the Latin Church.
St Benedict's Rule or ' Rule for Monasteries' draws its inspiration
from an anonymous text received from tradition, the ' Rule of the
Master'. Benedict, having practised this Rule at Subiaco, reduced and

318

B iographical Notes

remodelled it, transforming a diffuse text into a sober and balanced
document of great spiritual toughness and flexibility.
The monastery is a 'school of the Lord's service' entirely directed
towards the coming of the Kingdom. The monks, who are committed
to a lifelong 'stability', owe obedience to the abbot whom they have
elected for life. The abbot, who is at once administrator and spiritual
director, has to adapt the ascetical training to each person's vocation
in accordance with a love that includes 'discretion'. The monastery,
where relationships between the brethren strictly follow the grades
of -the hierarchy, forms a more or less self-contained society that is
organized for sharing and welcome. Manual work, the recitation of
the Divine Office, and times of solitude and silence in which prayerful
meditation on Scripture (the lectio divina) holds a prominent place,
make up the monk's life. There is a large measure of continuity
with Eastern sources of monasticism, either directly quoted (from St
Basil) or transmitted by Cassian, whose Conferences and Institutes
are mentioned at the end of St Benedict's Rule. The opening of one's
heart to the abbot, the control of one's thoughts, the registering
of spiritual progress by the degrees of humility, the fundamental
theme of 'peace', resembling Eastern hesychia, all these are marks
of fidelity to the spiritual Orient, and make Benedictine monasteries
still today places of the undivided Church. Moreover, the Rule, in
its conclusion, defines itself as a 'beginning' and makes reference to
the great witness of the original sources.
English translations of the Rule abound.

CLEMENT OF ALEXANDRIA ( 1 40 - c.220)

He was Christianity's first religious philosopher. Titus Flavius Clemens,
born to pagan parents, travelled far and wide in search of wisdom. He
visited Greece, Sicily where he became a Christian, Asia Minor, and
finally Egypt, where the teaching of the gnostic Pantaenus induced
him to settle in Alexandria. He became a spiritual teacher himself,
opening his school to pagans as well as Christians. It seems that he
was ordained priest. About 2 1 0 or 2 1 5 he put himself at the service of
the bishop of Jerusalem, and died a few years later. Clement considers
that Christianity is the thought and the knowledge par excellence,
since the Logos who became incarnate in Christ is he who creates and
structures the world, the Great Reason that enlightens every human

Biographical Notes

319