The Epistle to D I O G N ET U S (c. 200)
This short treatise, written in a limpid style and profound in its
thought, was composed in Egypt about 200 by an unknown person
(Marrou suggests Pantaenus, the teacher of Clement of Alexandria).
It is dedicated to a noble and cultured pagan, Diognetus, who is also
unknown, but perhaps was the tutor of Marcus Aurelius.
The text gives a most remarkable description of the Christian
vocation and way of life at a time when the Church was weak and
in a minority, in a pagan society that was often contemptuous and
hostile. The horizon for a Christian was martyrdom. The function
of example and intercession was ensured by the whole body of the
faithful who formed a 'spiritual republic'. There was no institution­
alized Christianity as yet, but there was not a ghetto either. Christians
lived among other people without anything external to distinguish
them, yet bearing the witness of mutual love, of service, of sharing,
of conjugal chastity and respect for the new-born child (so often in
those days abandoned or killed ) . By their prayer, by their example,
by the mere fact of their presence they are 'the soul of the world',
a priestly people set apart not for their own salvation but to pro­
tect and save all humankind.
The silence of the ages of Christendom in regard to this text is
understandable, as, also, is its relevance to contemporary issues.
Text SC 3 3

DroNYS IUS THE AREOPAGITE (c. soo)

When St Paul preached before the Areopagus at Athens and pro­
claimed the resurrection, almost all the hearers scoffed at him or
moved away. 'Some men, however, joined him and became believers,

326

Biographical Notes

including Dionysius, a member of the Council of the Areopagus' (Acts
I7.34). Greek tradition regarded him as the first bishop of Athens,
Latin tradition as the martyr bishop of Paris.
It was under the name of Dionysius, claiming his authority, that
an unknown writer at a considerably later date published a corpus
comprising four treatises: the Divine Names, the Mystical Theology,
the Celestial Hierarchy, together with about ten Letters.
To j udge by the theological and liturgical references, by the quo­
tations also from Proclus, the last great Neo-Piatonist philosopher, the
Dionysian corpus is to be dated to the beginning of the sixth century.
However, if the real Dionysius was a Greek thinker converted to
Christianity, the texts ascribed to his authorship may be said truly
to convey his spirit. They constitute in fact not a Hellenization of
Christianity but the brilliant Christianization of the highest thought
of expiring Hellenism, perhaps even of the loftiest Indo-European
mysticism.
For Dionysius (as we shall call the author of the mysterious
texts) the human being is not identified with God, but is made
divine in an inexhaustible communion. And God is not the One of
the Neo-Piatonists. As a result of the encounter of negative theology
with revelation, he is seen as 'super-Unity', a unity so productive that
it is at the same time Trinity.
Dionysius gives further precision to the distinction, sketched
out chiefly by the Cappadocians, between God's inaccessible 'super­
essence' and his 'theophanies', the revelations of his energies, his
dynameis. God is at once 'super-Unity' beyond all naming, and
the one to whom all beings give a name. The dynameis are not
emanations coming down into the material world, as with the Neo­
Piatonists. They denote an entire presence of the godhead in which
each created being participates in accordance with its 'paradigm',
its 'predefinition', those 'divine good wills that produce beings and
establish them within their limits'. (Divine Names, V,8). The uni­
verse is thus ordered in three-fold hierarchies - here Proclus can be
recognized - traversed by a double movement: that of the 'descent'
of the dynameis, God 'multiplying himself without losing his Unity'
and of the 're-ascent' of creatures towards their origin, becoming
as a result divine: and this is the specifically Christian touch, the
presupposition of our freedom.
This diversification and unification of created beings expresses
a Trinitarian rhythm. The two theological ways, the positive and
the negative, correspond to these movements. The negative way,
the re-ascent, is therefore superior. Even in symbolic knowledge

Biographical Notes

327

Dionysius prefers 'dissimilar' symbols whose poetic violence involves
negation - God as rock, fire, sun. The incarnation does not weaken
but rather emphasizes, very strongly, the irreducible character of the
mystery. Deification transfigures not only the intellect but also the
whole person who has become a 'son of the resurrection', caught
up into Christ's 'visible theophany'. But deification culminates in
'unknowing', in darkness, where the human person transcends even
his intellect to unite himself with the living God.
If Dionysius' ecclesial ideas represent the development of liturgy
in the direction of sacred spectacle, where the clergy appear as a
hierarchy of the initiated initiating others, it would be impossible
to exaggerate the importance of his mystical and symbolic theology,
introduced into the main stream of Tradition by the commentaries of
John of Scythopolis in the sixth century and completed by Maximus
the Confessor in the seventh.
Divine Names PG 3 , 5 8 5 -984; Mystical Theology PG 3 ,997-1048;
Celestial Hierarchy SC 5 8; Letters PG 3 , 1 06 5-1 I 20

DoROTHEUS OF GAZA ( 6th century)

Belonging to a well-to-do family, very cultured, so devoted to reading
that he took his library with him when he became a religious,
Dorotheus as a young man entered the abbot Seridos' monastery
near Gaza and became the spiritual son of Barsanuphius and John.
These 'great elders' moderated his longing for contemplation and
persuaded him to build a hospital for the monks so that he could
serve them there. He gradually gave up his possessions, his books,
his rich clothes. His correspondence with Barsanuphius is famous
for the 'contract' which the latter concluded with him. Barsanuphius
took Dorotheus' sins upon himself (Dorotheus was tormented by a
sexuality that he had not brought fully under control) on condition
that Dorotheus kept himself from pride, scandal-mongering and idle
talk, and forced himself to keep God's mercy in mind. It was a case
of starting with the most essential things.
After the death of the 'elders', about 5 40, Dorotheus left his
monastery and some distance away founded another community
to which he delivered the Instructions that have come down to
us. His realistic spirituality, full of a serene spirit of renunciation,
is resolutely cenobitic; the community forms a veritable ecclesial

328

Biographical Notes

body, each member of which has his own function to perform.
Dorotheus added to the wisdom of the desert a large amount of
pagan common sense. He emphasized conscience, the divine spark
in everyone, and he defined virtue in the same way as Aristotle, as
the 'mean between excess and default'.
Dorotheus puts the accent on 'keeping the commandments'
which alone can apply baptismal grace to the root of evil; on 'open­
ing of the heart' to a spiritual father, to whom he recommends
discretion; and very particularly on respect for others. He denounces
pride among monks and places humility at the summit of spiritual
development.
His influence was great on Theodore of Studium, and through
him on Eastern monasticism up to the present day.
Instructions SC 9 2

EPHRAIM O F SYRIA (c. 306 - 3 7 3 )