.
Those who are truly humble and really instructed are able,
when they approach the heavenly secrets, both to understand
certain of them that they have studied and to venerate others

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

103

that they have not understood in order to protect what they have
not yet understood.
GREGORY THE GREAT Commentary on the Book of job, 20,8, 1 9
(PL 7 6, 1 4 8 )

3 · Baptism: Entry into New Lzfe

To be baptized is to die and rise again with Christ, in him. To die
to the death that is so deeply entwined with our life. To cry out de
profundis and to meet even in hell the crucified God who does not
judge but welcomes us and who, in return for the least good will on
our part (which is why faith is indispensable to baptism, or to its
taking actual effect) raises us to life with himself.
Sanctify this water, that those who are baptized in it may be
crucified with Christ, die with him, be buried with him, and rise
again through adoption.
Apostolic Constitutions, 7,43 (F.X. Funk, I,

p.

450)

Baptism is total i mmersion in the choking water of death, from
which we emerge in the joy of breathing once again, of 'breathing
the Spirit'. For the water, changed from lethal into life-giving, em­
bodies the resurrectional power of the Spirit, of which it is a natural
symbol.
Paul, the imitator of Christ, says, 'Be conformed to his death in
order to attain to the resurrection of the dead' (cf. Romans 6.5 ).
How then do we enter into the likeness of his death? By being
buried with him in baptism. There is only one death and only one
resurrection, of which baptism is the figure. That is why the Lord
established the covenant of baptism, which contains the figure of
death and life, the water being the likeness of death and the Spirit
imparting life. The great mystery of baptism is performed with three
immersions and as many invocations, so that the figure of death may
be reproduced and that those who are baptized may be enlightened
by the transmission of the knowledge of God.
BASI L OF ClESAREA On the Holy Spirit, 1 5 (PG 3 2, 1 28-9)

You were asked, 'Do you believe in God the Father almighty?'

1 04

Initiation for Warfare

You answered, 'I believe', and you were immersed in the water,
that is, buried. A second time you were asked, 'Do you believe in
our Lord Jesus Christ and in his cross?' You answered, 'I believe',
and you were immersed in the water and thereby you were buried
with Christ. A third time you were asked, 'Do you believe in the
Holy Spirit?' and you were immersed a third time, in order that the
threefold confession might destroy your repeated falls in the past.
AMBROSE OF MILAN On the Sacraments, II1,?,20 (SC 2 5 ,

p.

68)

The water closes over the neophyte like a tomb. For the tomb
to become a womb the Holy Spirit must supernaturally intervene.
The Spirit given 'from above' brings the human being to a new birth,
clothing with incipient but real light the whole being, the heart, the
mind, the desires, all the faculties, the very senses. Here the words
of Jesus to Nicodemus at the beginning of St John's Gospel should
be remembered: 'Truly, truly, I say to you, unless one is born anew,
he cannot enter the kingdom of God . . . You must be born from
above [or 'anew'] . The wind blows where it wills, and you hear the
sound of it, but you do not know whence it comes or whither it
goes; so it is with everyone who is born of the Spirit' (John 3 · 5
& 8 ) . The Spirit, then, shapes the person who has been renewed
in water, which has become maternal, j ust as he brooded over the
original waters, but this time his work is re-creation. In the water
the hard growths of the soul, the callouses of the heart, are disolved.
The person becomes once again tractable and receives a form of light,
which is symbolized by the white garment put on after he or she
emerges, the symbol of the glorified body.
The threefold immersion signifies on the one hand the 'three
days' spent by Christ in the tomb, a tomb that was transformed,
according to the Easter liturgy, into a 'bridal chamber'. For baptism
recalls and re-enacts Good Friday and Holy Saturday and their
culmination in Easter Day (which is why in the ancient Church it
was conferred on the catechumens during the Easter Vigil, after the
long preparation of Lent). The lethal water becomes a womb by its
identification with the empty tomb.
On the other hand the threefold immersion signifies the three
Persons of the Trinity in whose name baptism is administered: 'Make
disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and
of the Son and of the Holy Spirit' (Matthew 2 8 . 1 9). The 'name'
signifies the presence. Baptism, which is conferred in Christ and
enables us to receive the Spirit, leads us into the Father's house. It
confers on us a Trinitarian mode of existence.

Ecclesia: A Place for Rebirth

1 05

Baptism has a twofold purpose: to destroy the body of sin so that
it can no longer produce fruit for death; and to live in the Spirit
bearing fruits of holiness. The water appears as the image of death
because it receives the body as if into a tomb; the Spirit infuses
life-giving strength and renews our life, which is in a mortal state
of sin, to the state of original life. This is being born again from
above, of water and the Spirit. In the water we die, but the Spirit
produces life in us. By three immersions and with three invocations
the great mystery of baptism is accomplished, so that death is
symbolically undergone, and the baptized are enlightened by the
communication of the knowledge of God.
BASI L OF C'ESAREA On the Holy Spirit, 1 5 (PG 1 29-3 2 )

The priest has to ask God to send the grace of the Holy Spirit
on the water to make it. the womb of a sacramental birth. For
Christ said to Nicodemus, 'Unless one is born of water and the
Spirit, he cannot enter the kingdom of God' (John 3 · 5 ) . Just as
in human birth the mother's womb receives a seed, but the hand
of God fashions it, so in baptism the water becomes a womb for
the one who is being born but the grace of the Spirit fashions
the baptized in a second birth.
THEODORE OF MoPSUESTIA Catechetical Homilies, 1 4,9
(Tonneau-Devreesse p . 4 2 1 )

Then you were led to the holy pool of baptism, j ust as Christ
was taken down from the cross and laid in the tomb that had
been prepared beforehand. Each one of you was questioned in the
name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. You professed
the saving faith and three times you were immersed in the water
and three times emerged. This symbolized Christ's burial for three
days. By this action you died and were born. The saving water was
your tomb and at the same time a womb.
CYRIL OF jERUSALEM Mystagogical Catecheses, Il,4 (SC 1 26,
1 10 & 1 1 2)

·
pp .

Chrismation, a later sacrament in the history of the Church,
completes baptism (with which it forms a single rite in the Eastern
Churches) by emphasizing its character of baptism in the Spirit.
Incorporated into Christ by baptism, the candidate now receives the
strength of the Spirit, the strength to 'realize' in a unique personal

106

Initiation for Warfare