If it happens that in seeing God one understands what is seen,
that means it is not God himself who is seen but one of those
knowable things that owe their being to him. For in himself he trans­
cends all intelligence and all essence. He exists in a superessential
mode and is known beyond all understanding only in so far as he
is utterly unknown and does not exist at all. And it is that perfect
unknowing, taken in the best sense of the word, that constitutes
the true knowing of him who transcends all knowing.
DIONYSJUS THE AREOPAGITE Letter I to Gaius (PG 3,1o6s)

The infinite is without doubt something of God, but not God
himself, who is infinitely beyond even that.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 91,1224)

We therefore say that the universal Cause, which is situated
beyond the whole universe, is neither matter . . . nor body; that it
has neither figure nor form, nor quality nor mass; that it is not in any

God, Hidden and Universal

31

place, that it defies all apprehension by the senses . . . Rising higher,
we now say that this Cause is neither soul nor intelligence . . . that
it can be neither expressed nor conceived, that it has neither number
nor order, nor greatness, nor littleness, nor equality, nor inequality,
nor likeness, nor unlikeness; it neither remains stationary nor moves
.
. . . that it is neither power nor light; that it neither lives nor is life;
that it is neither essence nor perpetuity, nor time; that it cannot be
grasped by the intellect; that it is neither science nor truth, nor
sovereignty, nor wisdom, nor singularity, nor unity, nor divinity,
nor goodness; neither spirit nor sonship nor fatherhood in any sense
that we can understand them; that it is not anything accessible to
our knowledge or to the knowledge of any being; it has nothing to
do with non-being, but no more has it anything to do with being;
that no one knows its nature . . . that it eludes all reasoning, all
nomenclature, all knowing; that it is neither darkness nor light,
neither error nor truth; that absolutely nothing can be asserted of it
and absolutely nothing denied; that when we formulate affirmations
or negations applying to realities that are inferior to it, we are not
affirming or denying anything about the Cause itself: because all
affirmation remains on this side of the transcendence of him who
is divested of everything and stands beyond everything.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Mystical Theology, IV & V (PG 3 ,
1 04?-8)

The mystery that is beyond God himself,
the Ineffable,
that gives its name to everything,
is complete affirmation, complete negation,
beyond all affirmation and all negation.
DIONYSIUS THE AREOPAGITE Divine Names, 11,4 (PG 3 , 64 1 )

This simultaneous negation o f affirmation and negation means
that God's transcendence eludes our very idea of transcendence. God
transcends his own transcendence, so that he may not be lost in
abstract nothingness, but may give himself. The simultaneous over­
corning of affirmation and negation already outlines the antinomy of
personal existence: the more it is hidden the more it is given; the more
it is given the more hidden it is. That is why the Fathers also speak
of God as inaccessible, of God beyond God, in terms of a springing
forth, a creative and redemptive leap outside his essence, following
the eternal movement of the divine energies, but also in order to

32

Understanding the Mysteries

communicate these to creatures by personal actions, because the
living God is a God who acts. He is not being but he contains it,
and by his actions enables creatures to share in it.
.
When God, who is absolute fullness, brought creatures into exist­
ence, it was not done to fulfil any need, but so that his creatures
should be happy to share his likeness, and so that he himself might
rejoice in the joy of his creatures as they draw inexhaustibly upon
the Inexhaustible.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity, III, 46 (PG 90,
434)

He is called God because he has built everything on its own
foundations, and because he makes a leap: 1 leaping means giving
life to the world . . . He is almighty, he contains everything: the
heights of heaven, the depths of the abyss, the bounds of the earth
are in his hand.
THEOPHILUS OF ANTIOCH First Book to Autolycus, 4 (SC

20, p.

64)

God has always existed and he always will exist: or to put
it better, God always exists. In fact 'past' and 'future' express the
fragments of duration as we know it, gliding naturally along. But
he, God, is 'eternal Existence' and this is the name that he gives
himself when he reveals the future to Moses on the mountain. He
actually contains in himself all being, that which had no being
and will have no end, what I would call an ocean of being without
limit and without end, beyond any notions of duration and nature
that our intellect could form for itself. The intellect can evoke him
only obscurely . . . not with any knowledge of his true nature, but
by looking at what surrounds it. By assembling and interpreting
the images in our mind we can begin to reconstruct something
approaching an idea of the Truth . . . He enlightens the higher part
of our being, provided it has been purified, just as a sudden flash of
lightning strikes our eyes; and that, in my opinion, is so that he
may draw us to himself in proportion to the understanding we
have of him . . . and that in so far as we fail to understand him he
may excite our curiosity; this will awake in our soul the longing to
know him further; this longing will lay bare our soul; this nakedness
I The word theos (God ) is here derived from the verbs theirai (to found) and
theein (to leap) - beyond every limit!

God, Hidden and Universal

33

will make us like God. When we have reached this state, God will
converse with us as friends. If I may dare say so, God will be
united with gods, and revealing himself to them, and will be known
to the same extent as he is known.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 45, For Easter, 3 (PG 3 6,847)

These words are charged with the negative approach to God,
with his silence. Referring to the Ineffable, they speak of the presence
and the action of the One of whom a 19th century saint declared that
'he is a fire that inflames our entra ils'. These affirmations perfected
by negations state that God is Spirit, Fire, Light, Life, Love. Here
one recognizes the very words and attitudes of Jesus.
God is Breath, for the breath of the wind is shared by all, goes
everywhere; nothing shuts it in, nothing holds it prisoner.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR On the Divine Names, I, 4 (PG 4,208)