. . . and he ate some honey and fish. Thus he proved to them that
resurrection would come to our actual fleshly bodies. Further­
more, having declared that our dwelling-place will be in the
heavens, he wanted to show that it is not impossible for the
flesh to go to 'heaven'. Indeed, they saw him 'taken up into
heaven' (Mark 1 6.19) just as he was, that is to say, in the flesh.
JusTIN Fragment 9 (in H. Lassiat, op. cit.,

p.

1 5 6-7)

At the inmost centre of the human being the great spiritual
writers of the undivided Church see 'the heart'. This 'heart', which
incorporates the organ so named without being wholly identified
with it, is the site of a 'love-knowledge' in which the whole human
being is at once gathered together and opened up. This 'Spirit-heart'
is open to the Holy Spirit and receives the light of the godhead to
communicate it to the body . . . For the flesh can become spiritual,
while on the other hand the highest intelligence, if it refuses to
admit mystery, becomes fleshly.
Grace engraves on the heart of the children of light the laws
of the Spirit. They must not therefore draw their confidence
only from the Scriptures written in ink, for God's grace also
inscribes the laws of the Spirit, the celestial mysteries, on the
tables of the heart. The heart, in fact, directs and rules the
whole body. Once grace possesses the pastures of the heart,
it reigns over all its members and all its thoughts. For therein
is the mind and all the thoughts of the soul and its hope.
Through the heart, grace passes into all the members of the body.
PsEuoo-MACARIUS Fifth Homily,

20

(PG 34,589)

The account of the 'fall' in Genesis is given by several Fathers
a very profound interpretation which rules out any 'jealousy' on
God's part, and any idea of a terrifying godhead. The 'tree of life'
was the tree of contemplation, the possibility of knowing the world
in God. Adam and Eve would not have been able to approach it
except after long preparation; if they had gone there in a state of
childish innocence (a theme dear to St lremeus), or in an attitude of
egocentric greed, in order to plunder the world instead of reverencing
it and offering it to God, they would have been burnt by the brilliance
of the godhead. They needed to mature, to grow to awareness by
willing detachment and by faith, a loving trust in a personal God.

The Human Vocation

85

Hence the prohibition, which the tempter insinuates to be a general
and absolute ban, imposed by a jealous creator seeking to tyran­
nize over his creatures. Then they wish to 'take possession of the
things of God without God'. And God keeps them away from
the tree of life to avoid their being deified whilst in a state of
falsehood and 'self-idolatry', which would mean an irremediable
hell. Hence we have death, the result of the transgression, but also
its remedy, since it makes humanity aware of its finiteness, and
lays it open to grace. Hence also the 'tunics of skin' with which
God, according to Genesis, clothed them after their fall. These are
ambiguous, as death is, inasmuch as they signify a mortal life. For
on the one hand they symbolize a certain opaqueness, that of a
universe delivered up by humanity to death. On the other hand they
represent an adaptation to this state of affairs, a protection that
makes possible history, and that slow progress of revelation about
which St Irenreus speaks. For the fall veiled but in no way destroyed
the image of God in humanity. The symbolic account of the fall
portrays an original condition which we cannot reach with our
present understanding, because the conditions of time and space and
material existence in it were utterly different (we can scarcely begin
to imagine them except in Christ's transfigured humanity). What we
call evolution is a merciful resumption by divine Wisdom of this fallen
creation which was otherwise doomed to a 'flood' of disintegration.
By evolution 'tunics of skin' were developed, so that humanity,
stripped of the garment of paradisial light, might at last regain it.
The fall is permanent, as are all the principal acts of spiritual
history. The Logos never ceases conquering death by death, bringing
forth life in all its complexity, from a disintegrating universe. The
cross and the resurrection are inherent in the very stuff of things.
They are at work right up till the moment when the incarnation
and the passion of the Word give rise, in this mortal life of victory
and defeat, to an immortal life where humanity is invited to join
in the final complete victory.
God placed man in paradise - whatever this paradise was - and
gave him freedom, in order that the happiness of the beneficiary
might be as great as that of the benefactor. He bade him watch over
immortal plants, possibly divine thoughts . . . He gave him a law to
exercise his freedom. This law was a commandment: he might pick
the fruit of some trees, and one that he might not touch. This tree
was the tree of knowledge. God had not planted it originally for the
undoing of man and it was not out of jealousy that God forbade

86

Understanding the Mysteries

him to go near it - let not the enemies of God intervene here; let
them not imitate the serpent - no, it was of his goodness, if this
prohibition be understood rightly. For that tree was, to my mind,
the tree of contemplation, which only those could enter into without
harm whose spiritual preparation had reached sufficient perfection.
On the other hand, that tree could only be a source of misfortune
for souls as yet too coarse, endowed with too bestial an appetite,
just as solid food is harmful to babies who still need milk. When
through the devil's hatred . . . the first man had succumbed - alas!
for my weakness, for that weakness of my distant ancestor is mine
. . . he was cut off from the tree of life, from paradise and from
God himself. He clothed himself in tunics of skin. This can signify
a flesh more dense, mortal and perverse. And for the first time he
recognized his own loss of dignity and tried to hide from God. But
he also gained us death . . . so that evil should not be immortal.
The penalty became in this way love for humanity. That, I think,
is the divine way of punishing.
GREGORY NAZIANZEN Oration 45, For Easter, 8 (PG J 6, 8 s o)

Having become God by deification, human beings would have been
able to contemplate, with God himself, the works of God. They
would have received knowledge of them in God.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Questions to Thalassius, Prologue
(PG 90,257)

Now human beings sought to take hold of the things of God without
God, before God, and not after his will.
MAXIMUS THE CONFESSOR Ambigua (PG 9 1 , 1 1 56)

Death is nothing else but separation from God . . . and as a
necessary consequence, death of the body.
MAXIMUS THE CoNFESSOR Centuries on Charity 11,93 (PG 90,4 2 5 )

Thus God cannot be held responsible for evil, for he is the
author of what is, and not of what is not. It is he who made
sight, not blindness . . . And that without subjecting us to his
good pleasure by any violent constraint. He did not draw us
towards what is good against our will, as if we were an inanimate
object. If when the light shines very brightly . . . someone chooses

87

The Human Vocation

to hide his eyes by lowering his eyelids, the sun is not responsible
for the fact that he cannot see it.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Catechetical Oration 7 (PG 4 5 , 3 2)