This penetration o f the light into the subconscious manifests
itself, as we have already suggested, in the form of dreams full of
joy and peace, that are sometimes prophetic. Diadochus of Photike
here describes the criteria that make it possible to distinguish dreams
like this from those which display diabolical forces.
Dreams appearing to the soul in the love of God are sure signs
of a healthy soul. They do not skip lightly from one image to
another. They do not alarm the senses . . . They fill the soul with
spiritual happiness. Even after awakening, the soul seeks with an
ardent desire the joy of th!! dream. Diabolical apparitions behave in
contrary fashion. They change rapidly . . . they speak loudly, utter
great threats, overwhelm the soul with their cries. Then the spirit,
if it has been purified, recognizes them and awakens the body . . .
It may happen that good dreams do not bring joy to the soul but
cause it sadness and tears without pain. That is the case with those
who are making great progress in humility.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 3 7 (SC 5 bis, p. 1 0 6)

It is therefore necessary to possess 'discernment of spirits': not
only to know how to progress through the flood, or j ungle of
thoughts without being dragged helplessly along by them, but also
to know how to sift the 'good' from the 'bad'. In the good our true
nature is at work, attracted by grace, but in the bad the foreign
powers envelop the soul in a strait-jacket and interpose themselves
between the spirit and the heart.
This attention to one's thoughts, this particularly fruitful 'fish­
ing' in the silence of the night, when the subconscious becomes
accessible, must all be placed in the context of prayer. For it is
only by his relation with God that a person can break free from
external conditioning.
And this prayer must be discreet, indeed secret. 'Go into your
room and shut the door,' says Jesus - for fear of being ostentatious
and causing embarrassment to others.
This is the true foundation of prayer: keeping watch over your
own thoughts and giving yourself to prayer in great tranquillity,

1 70

Initiation for Warfare

in great peace, in such a way as not to disturb others . . . You
will then have to wage war on your own thoughts and cut back
their rampant growth . . . push ahead towards God, refrain from
doing as your thoughts would have you do, but on the contrary
lead them back from their dispersion, sifting the natural thoughts
from those that are bad. The soul subjected to sin advances as if
across a river choked with reeds and sedge . . . Anyone wishing to
cross over must reach out with his hands and laboriously root out
by force the obstacles in his way. Thus do thoughts from the enemy
power imprison the soul as in a strait-jacket. It requires great zeal
and great alertness to discern them.
Pswoo-MACARIUS Sixth Homily, (PG 34,520)

In most of the texts the 'heart' is understood as the centre of the
personality where all our faculties meet. It is the 'heart-spirit' already
purified, especially by baptismal grace. So it is necessary to practise
'custody of the heart' by the discerning of the thoughts.
Be the door-keeper of your heart and do not let any thought come
in without questioning it. Question each thought individually: 'Are
you on our side or the side of our foes?' And if it is one of ours,
it will fill you with tranquillity.
EVAGRIUS OF PoNTUS Letter

II

(Frankenberg, p. 5 7 5 )

An ambiguous 'thought' is put in parenthesis, some way off,
and is bombarded with rays of prayer until it is harmonized or it
disintegrates.
Wake up, keep watch! If the thought that comes to you is a
good thought you should know that God wants to open up a way
of life for you . . . But if the thought is dark, if you are in two minds
because you cannot see clearly whether it is to help you or deceive
you - since an evil thought can be hidden under an appearance of
good - keep watch night and day in the ardour and intensity of
prayer so as to prepare yourself to fight it. Do not chase after it
and do not accept it either, but pray about it earnestly. Do not
cease to call on the Lord and he will show you whence it comes.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 34 (Spanos, p. 1 4 8 )

Invocation of the name of Jesus is habitual in these exercises
of discernment. It is important that the 'natural' thought giving

Passions Transfigured, Thought Transcended

1 71

expression to the deep but still blind yearning of the soul should
be enlightened and strengthened by being clothed with the name
of Christ. Any idolatrous or obsessive idea is dashed against this
name. For example the name of Jesus may be invoked faster and
faster until the soul is quieted. This is how the monks used to
interpret the psalm of the exiles that recommends the dashing of
the 'children of Babylon' against the rocks. The children symbolize
negative thoughts. The rock is Christ.
On this point too it will be seen that Benedictine monasticism
is hardly distinguished from Eastern monasticism.
He who acts righteously . . . is he who drives the devil from his
heart. He seizes this brood of devilish thoughts and dashes it to
pieces against Christ.
BENEDICT OF NuRSIA Rule, Prologue 28 (Centenario, p. 6)
Sometimes it is preferable, instead of tackling 'thoughts' head
on, to break off all contact with them and to take refuge in Christ.
Witness a moving passage about such a 'little way' from that giant
of ascesis, Isaac of Nineveh.
There is no need to set oneself against the thoughts. Better take
refuge in God. If we refrain from opposing the thoughts sown in
us by the devil, and in prayer to God break off all contact with
them, that is the sign that the intelligence has discovered the
wisdom that comes from grace, and that true knowledge has freed
us from too much action. Thus we have mastered the shortest
route.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 3 3 (p. 144)
After all, it is not the human being acting alone, but the coming
of the Spirit that cleanses the soul of all the dust of 'reasonings and
thoughts'. The 'true recollection' is not so much mastered as received.
But we must prepare to receive it.
The Holy Spirit taking pity on our weakness VISits us even
when we are still not purified. Provided only that he finds our
intelligence simply praying with a desire for true recollection,
he comes down upon it and scatters the whole troop of reasonings

1 72

Initiation for Warfare