Let the mindfulness of death be present when you fall asleep and
when you wake up. In this way you will be protected during your
sleep.
joHN CuMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 1 5th Step, 5 1 (p. 9 1 )
The 'mindfulness o f death' i s thus the way to the most profound
contemplation.
The mindfulness of death is the first thought by which the love of
God leads the soul to life and fills the heart . . . When the power of
God wants to manifest life in a person's heart, it plants this thought
there as a foundation. If it is not quenched by the complexities and
vanity of this life, if it is allowed to grow in peace . . . it leads him
to the most profound contemplation, too profound for words.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 39 (p. 1 67)
The experience of humility and the 'mindfulness of death' is
bound up with the 'gift of tears'. The heart is broken and exults
in the Spirit with immense joy. The joy is 'sorrowful' because it is
inseparable from the cross, but it is the sign that all the strength of
human suffering, crucified and risen, is being healed, pacified, and
transfigured in a kind of ontological tenderness. The whole being
is wonderfully torn apart, and the heart of stone becomes a heart
of flesh; discreet and gentle tears begin to flow, not distorting the
face. This 'emotion' of the heart, that everyone feels at certain
moments when experiencing compassion or love or beauty, from
now on becomes a settled state.
The tears are at first those of bitterness and despair, when the
Spirit makes us aware of our 'unlikeness', of our complicity in hatred
and destruction. Then they become tears of gratitude and fervour be­
cause 'the cross is the j udgment of judgment' and 'Christ is risen'.
Pray first of all to receive the gift of tears in order to soften the
hardness of your heart by 'breaking' it.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS On Prayer, 5 (Philokalia 1, 1 77)
Conversion and humility direct the soul aright.
Compassion and gentleness make it strong.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS The Mirror of Monks, 5 3 (Gressman, p. 1 5 7)

Confidence and Humility

1 63

Sadness weighs us down,
self-disgust is unbearable.
But tears before God are stronger than either.
EvAGRIUS OF PoNTUS The Mirror of Nuns, 39 (Gressman, p. 149)
The water of tears is a return to the source, to the water of
baptism, and so to the waters of creation that are amenable to the
Spirit. The 'baptism of tears', this conscious realization of baptismal
grace, is the same thing as 'baptism in the Spirit'.
So anguish, by becoming prayer, is turned with all its ardour
into peace and light.
Nothing is so well calculated to dispel sloth and negligence as
anguish that gathers the spirit together from all sides and makes
it return into itself. Anyone who prays in anguish will be able,
after his prayer, to know a great joy in his soul. Just as clouds
when they gather begin by making the day dark, then, once they
have poured out all the water they contained, the atmosphere is
serene and light; so anguish, as it builds up in our heart, plunges
our thoughts into darkness, but then, when it has vented all its
bitterness through prayer and accompanying tears, it brings to the
soul a great light. God's influence irradiates the soul of the one
who is praying, like a ray of sunlight.
joHN CHRYSOSTOM On the Incomprehensibility of God, Sermon 5
(PG 48,744)

The mystery of tears fashions us after the mystery of Golgotha,
of the sacred agony in which all the sorrow of the world is gathered
up and all its joy is inaugurated. We have to stand, like St John, with
Mary, at the foot of the cross.
Abba Joseph used to relate what Abba Isaac said: 'One day I
was sitting near Abba Poimen and I saw him in ecstasy, and as
I enjoyed great freedom of speech with him, I prostrated myself and
besought him saying, "Tell me, where were you? " And he replied
in embarrassment, "My thoughts were there where Mary was, the
holy Mother of God, weeping over the cross of the Saviour. And
for my part I wish I could always be thus weeping. " '
Sayings of the Desert Fathers, Poi men I 5 I (SO I , p . 246-7)
Little by little, through the tears there comes a smile, something
familiar to the child but forgotten by the adult.

164

Initiation for Warfare

One who goes on his way to God with interior tears never ceases
keeping festival.
joHN CLIMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 7th Step, 3 8 (4 1 )
(p. 65)

One who is clothed with blessed tears for a wedding dress knows
the soul's spiritual smile.
jOHN CLIMACUS Ibid. 44(4 1 ) p. 66

At the beginning of the spiritual life God is accustomed to reveal
himself clearly. But the person who is still inexperienced mixes these
experiences with his imagination and takes them too seriously. Then
there comes the exodus through the wilderness, the 'sadness for God'
and the tears of sorrow, then the tears 'without sorrow'. And he
receives the true joy as a grace that is indeed a 'free gift', a joy
that he can now welcome in complete humility, one which radically
re-creates him. As the world was created from the primordial waters,
so is man re-created from the water of his tears.
The initial joy is one thing, the joy that consummates is another.
The former is vulnerable to imagination, the latter has the strength
of humility. Between the two comes a blessed sadness, and tears
without sorrow.
DIADOCHUS OF PHOTIKE Gnostic Chapters, 6o (SC 5 bis, p. 1 20)

A 'stranger on earth', the spiritual person's dwelling is found in
God. Eros is transfigured and illumined by the contemplation of the
human face of God. Then comes the experience of the true joy, pure
and fundamental, joy in the Father and the Son, joy that is almost the
Spirit himself, in the Kingdom of the Father to which the Son admits
us.
The Father of all things is a well-beloved kingdom.
Anyone who is in him,
anyone who establishes his dwelling in him,
finds his joy in living as a stranger
because he has for delicious food
the beauty of God's face.
EvAGRIUS OF PONTUS Centuries, Suppl. 57 (in Hausherr p. 1 8 6)

The name of the Son of God is great, majestic, upholding the

Confidence and Humility

165

whole world. Now consider those whom he upholds. They are
those who bear his name in the depths of their heart. He then
becomes their support, he maintains them in joy because they are
not ashamed to bear his name.
HERMAS The Shepherd, 9 1 , 5-6 (SC 5 3 , p. 3 26)

A text of the second century which shows the Christian aware­
ness of fundamentals emphasizes that joy is the true condition of
humanity.
Clothe yourself then in joy where God delights to be. Make
it your delight. For every joyful person acts well, thinks rightly,
and tramples sadness underfoot. The gloomy person on the other
hand always acts badly. In the first place such a one does wrong
by grieving the Holy Spirit who is given to us as joy. Then . . . the
gloomy person is guilty of impiety in not praying to the Lord . . . for
prayer offered in sadness lacks the strength to ascend to the altar of
God . . . Sadness mingled with prayer prevents it from rising, just as
vinegar mingled with wine robs it of its flavour . . . Purify your heart
then of the sadness that is evil, and you will be living for God. And
all those who have stripped themselves of sadness in order to put
on joy will likewise be living for God.
HERMAS The Shepherd, 4 2, 1 -4 (SC 5 3 , p. 190)