Syriac Christians call Ephraim their 'prophet', the 'doctor o f the
universe', the 'pillar of the Church', the 'harp of the Holy Spirit'.
His hymns have been incorporated into Syriac liturgies. He has been
translated, interpolated and imitated in Greek, Armenian, Coptic,
Arabic, and Ethiopic. The rhythms of his memre - catenae of equi­
syllabic verses, rather discursive - and of his madrashe - unequal
strophes sung by a soloist with a refrain taken up by a choir - inspired
Byzantine hymn-writing, especially that of Romanus the Melodist.
Ephraim was born in Semitic Mesopotamia, at Nisibis, into a
Christian family. He was lastingly influenced by the bishop of that
city, James, a great ascetic and a great intellectual who fostered the
development of a specifically Syriac theology. He became a 'monk
living at home', a vocation common at that time, with brief spells as
an anchorite. He was ordained deacon, but always refused the priest­
hood and the episcopate, going so far, according to Sozomenes, as to
feign madness. Under James' successor, Vologesis, ( 3 4 6-3 6 1 ) whom
he admired just as much, Ephraim appears as a recognized master
of the spiritual life. On several occasions when the Persians were
threatening the city, he gave effective advice to his fellow-citizens.
In 3 6 3 the Roman Empire ceded Nisibis to the Sassanids. Ephraim,
with the greater part of the Christian population, took refuge in
Roman territory at Edessa, where he founded the famous 'school of

Biographical Notes

329

the Persians'. He kept in touch with the solitaries of the mountains
and often spent a period of retirement among them.
As a deacon, both at Nisibis and at Edessa, Ephraim directed
the performance in church of his own compositions, accompanying
choirs of children and nuns on the harp.
His enormous literary output is at times autobiographical, as in
his Songs of Nisibis in which he mourns the tragedy of his native city
and celebrates the two bishops who were his teachers. Most often,
however, his treatises are exegetical and his hymns are devoted
to faith, to the principal aspects of salvation, and to ascesis. He
expresses himself in quite a different cultural universe from that
of the Greek Fathers, whose precise and complex elaborations are
entirely foreign to him. Ephraim's thought in fact is wholly Semitic,
lyrical, biblical, full of images. His images have to be opposed to
one another in order to suggest the ineffable character of mystery.
In this process it is faith itself that stands out as knowledge and
participation in the divine life.
Two main themes run through his thinking: the importance of
the Holy Spirit and an existential dualism.
To convey some idea of the Trinity Ephraim speaks of the
sun, its rays and its warmth. The Spirit is ' breath and fire'. The
incarnation is the work of the Spirit. The body of Christ is white hot
with the fire of the Spirit. The same thing is true of his sacramental
body, and the Eucharist, especially, appears as 'fire and Spirit'.
Deification also is a pneumatization, a being incorporated into the
Spirit - sacramental prophecy.
On the other hand Ephraim writes well on Syriac spirituality.
He is less sensitive to the cosmic order than the Greeks are, but he
pays much more attention to anguish. It is true that he opposed
the ontological dualism of the Manichees, but he himself asserted
a vigorous existential dualism. The real world is Paradise where
God and the angels dwell. We have lost it through the fall, but it
has been re-opened to us in the mystical profundity of the Church.
The fallen world is that of the beasts that devour one another,
and of human beings who are beasts too, damned and damning
others, doomed to hell unless they repent. It is essential to flee
the world to regain the state of Paradise in which the body is
swallowed up by the soul and the soul by the Spirit. Fasting and
vigils prepare for this metamorphosis. But the important thing is
to break radically with violence and sex, since death and sexuality,
those twins, stamp the world with the seal of bestiality. The angel
and the Incarnate One are virgin.

330

Biographical Notes

This sensitivity to anguish, this passionate desire to escape from
the world, this existential dualism, through Syrian authors and also
through renewed forms of Manichaeism (Paulicians, Bogomils) pas­
sed into the Balkans and Russia. We see them rising up again today
with The Angel by Jambet and Lardreau, a pitiless interiorization of
the revolution, and with The Power of Horror by Julia Kristeva, the
well known Bulgarian writer.
Sancti Ephraem Syri Hymni et Sermones, T.J. Lamy 4 vols.,
Malines 1 8 8 2-1 902; On Faith, Hymns CSCO 1 54 & 1 5 5 Syriac
Text and German Translation

EuTHYMIUS ZIGABENUS (c. u oo)

Euthymius was a Byzantine theologian who at the request of the
Emperor Alexis I Commenus ( 1o8 1- I I 1 6) composed a Dogmatic
Panoply, a vast compilation studying the various heresies without
great originality but furnishing much information.
Dogmatic Panoply PG 1 3 0

EVAGRIUS O F PONTUS ( 3 46 - 3 99)

One of the most important teachers of ascesis and mysticism, Evagrius
was born on the shores of the Black Sea (Pontus), at Ibora. He
received his early formation from the Cappadocian Fathers, St Basil
who ordained him reader, and especially St Gregory Nazianzen who
conferred the diaconate on him and whom he accompanied to
Constantinople. In the capital Evagrius, handsome, cultured, and
an outstanding orator, distinguished himself in the struggle against
Arianism and embarked on a high ecclesiastical career. However,
being swept off his feet by an overwhelming love, he fled to Jerusalem
where he fell in with the Origenist circle (Melania, Rufinus) and was
permanently influenced by it. About 3 8 3 he withdrew to the Egyptian
desert, became a monk, and frequented the greatest of the solitaries,
especially Macarius of Egypt, earning his living as a copyist. But he
stood out from the rest, first as an intellectual, and then because he
belonged to the small 'confraternity' of Origenist monks. He died
shortly before persecution descended on the group.

Biographical Notes

331

In the wake of Origen, and to some extent also of Gregory of
Nyssa, Evagrius developed an imposing gnosis. To begin with there
was an immense spiritual unity of 'pure intellects' open to the divine
light and to one another. But either through over-exposure or inad­
vertence they became separated from God, their unity was broken
and they were distinguishable from one another by the different
degrees of openness they had lost. Then God, or more precisely
Christ, the only intellect to remain faithful, preserved by a second
creation the souls that had become so darkened, by giving to each
of them the frame and the milieu that suited its state and enabled it
to make progress. In this way there appears a multitude of 'aeons',
angelic, human, and diabolical. All spiritual evolution in this life and
the next comes a bout by the transition from one 'aeon' to another,
from a certain state of 'corporeity' to a different one. In the end all will
be brought together again in their original unity and equality, and they
will become 'Christs' with Christ who has made himself their way.
At the same time Evagrius formulated monastic experience sys­
tematically. The spiritual life is divided into two stages:
I . The 'practical' life, the struggle against the passions by which
the person who thinks he is improving himself is dragged down.
The devils seduce seculars and even cenobites with this-worldly
objects; they seduce solitaries with 'thoughts' and these are eight in
number: greed, impurity, love of money, depression, anger, aversion
( 'accidie'), vainglory, pride. 'Thoughts' are neutralized and the soul
is made one again with the intellect for the pursuit of the virtues:
faith, fear of God, self-control, patience, hope. At the end comes
apatheia ( literally the state of absence of passion) , that which makes
love possible.
2. The gnostic life