There remains the problem of the 'second death' of which the
Apocalypse speaks (Revelation 2o. q), the problem of the 'eternal'
hell after the Parousia.
For the highest spirituality (and theology) of the first centuries,
God will be 'all in all'. Certain Fathers granted that God would
turn away from those who turned away from him. This is what
Western Scholasticism was to term poena damni, the penalty of
damnation. Such a fundamentalist reading of the Gospels (which
leads to speculation on the nature of the 'worm' and the 'fire' that
will torment the damned ) was denounced not only as external but
as 'absurd' by the greatest representatives of the earliest Christianity,
for example by St Ambrose of Milan and john Cassian in the West,
and in the East, quite apart from strict Origenism, by Gregory
of Nyssa, john Climacus, Maximus the Confessor, and Isaac of
Nineveh.
For this last author, whose development of the doctrine of hell
is undoubtedly the most important contribution to this subject in the
whole of Christian theology, it is unthinkable and contrary to the very
spirit of the Christian revelation that God should a bandon anyone.
God, in Christ, gives to everyone the fullness of his love. But this love
can be experienced as torment by those who reject it. In its light they
discover how much they have sinned against it. The fire of hell is the
fire of love that gives remorse a terrible clarity.
As for me, I say that those who are tormented in hell are tormented
by the invasion of love. What is there more bitter and more violent
that the pains of love? Those who feel that they have sinned against
love bear in themselves a damnation much heavier than the most
dreaded punishments. The suffering with which sinning against
love afflicts the heart is more keenly felt than any other torment.
It is absurd to suppose that sinners in hell are deprived of God's
love. Love . . . is offered impartially. But by its very power it acts in
two ways. It torments sinners, as happens here on earth when we
are tormented by the presence of a friend to whom we have been
unfaithful. And it gives joy to those who have been faithful. That
is what the torment of hell is in my opinion - remorse.
IsAAc OF NINEVEH Ascetic Treatises, 84 (p. 3 26)
We must pray, however, that the fire of j udgement - which is the
fire of God's love - will not consume the wicked, but only that part in
each one which is evil. The division into 'sheep' and 'goats' of which
the Last judgement scene speaks would thus be made, not between

304

Approaches to Contemplation

two crowds of human beings, but between two kinds of character
within each individual. In practice, other parables of a similar kind
like that of the 'good seed' and the 'tares' cannot be interpreted in
any other way. Jesus explains that the 'good seed means the sons of
the Kingdom; the weeds are the sons of the evil one', and that at the
end these latter will be cast into the blazing furnace ( Matthew I 3 . 3 6).
Only Gnostics and Manicheans can hold that it is a question here of
people. All human beings are creatures of God. What is 'sown by the
devil' is destructive suggestions, the seeds of idolatry and folly. Good
seed and tares are human dispositions. To destroy the thoughts sown
by the evil one is not to destroy the person but to cauterize him. What
Gregory of Nyssa suggests is precisely this divine surgery.
The body is subject to various sorts of illness. Some are easy to
treat, others are not, and for the latter recourse is had to incisions,
cauterization, bitter medicine . . . We are told something of the
same sort about the judgement in the next world, the healing of
the soul's infirmities. If we are superficial people, that amounts to
a threat and a process of severe correction, so· that the fear of a
painful expiation may lead us to fly from wrongdoing and become
wiser people. But the faith of deeper minds regards it as a process
of healing and a therapy applied by God in such a way as to bring
back the being he created to its original grace.
In fact those who by incisions or cauterization remove boils
or warts that have formed contrary to nature on the surface of
the body, do not bring about the healing without pain; but it is
not to do harm to the patient that they carry out the incision.
It is the same with the 'warts' that have formed on our souls
. . . at the moment of judgment they are cut out and removed
by the ineffable wisdom and power of him who is, as the Gospel
says, the physician of the sick.
GREGORY OF NYSSA Great Catechetical Oration, 8 (PG 4 5 , 3 6-7)

Certainly one cannot put limits to our terrible freedom as human
beings ( God himself had his hands bound on the cross). Nor, how­
ever, can one limit the prayer and the hope of the saints.
That all should attain to complete detachment is impossible. But it
is not impossible that all should be saved and reconciled to God.
joHN CLJMACUS The Ladder of Divine Ascent, 26th step, 54(65),
(p. 1 3 3 )

The Difficult Love

305

The same individual is at the same time saved and condemned.
AMBROSE OF MILAN Commentary on Psalm
1 5,1238)

r r8,

20, 5 8 (PL

And what does he need in order to be saved, except to know
himself condemned and not to despair? Deeper than hell is Christ
the conqueror of hell.
Prayer then has the last word.
We do not speculate about hell.
Neither need we formulate a doctrine of universal salvation.
We pray that all may be saved.
'One does not save oneself on one's own,' wrote Peguy. 'One
does not return alone to the Father's house. One gives a hand to
others. The sinner holds the hand of the saint and the saint holds
the hand of Jesus.'
The third of the sons' petitions is this, 'Thy will be done on earth
as in heaven' . . . this petition can be understood to mean that it is
God's will that all should be saved, in accordance with St Paul's
well-known words: 'God wills that all should be saved and come
to the knowledge of the truth' ( 1 Timothy 2.4) . . . Therefore when
we say, 'Thy will be done on earth as it is in heaven,' we are praying:
'Like those who are in heaven, may all those who are on earth be
saved, Father, by the knowledge of thy name.'
jOHN CASSIAN Conferences, IX,2o (SC 54>

p.

s8)

St Isaac of Nineveh, in writings inspired by perfect adoration,
designs and paints an icon of God's crazy love for humankind, an
icon as beautiful and disturbing as the fresco of the descent into hell
at Chora. No, the Lord's compassion will not be defeated. For it must
indeed be said 'God is not j ust', not as atheists say, who only see the
earth and do not notice on it the cross or the empty tomb, but on
the basis of the cross, the tomb and Easter. This contradicts many
theologians who are petrified in their own human idea of j ustice,
and seek to impose it on God. Many indications in the evolution
of Jewish thought suggested, and still do suggest, that the essence
of biblical justice is Love. An evening prayer of the synagogue says:
'Almighty Lord, King of heaven and earth, I give thee thanks for the
gift of the Law by which I can impress on my flesh my love for
thee.' The Law is already an exchange of Love. The 'Lord-Love',
the 'Love without limits', in the words of a 'Monk of the Eastern

306

Approaches to Contemplation