The book cover shows part of a painting by Jung
from his Red Book: A small figure bows low close to
the ground in homage to an enormous fire spout;
as it erupts the air is filled with intricately formed
red, orange and yellow flames. The original work
refers to the Satapatha Brâhmana 2, 2, 4, a
particular section of an ancient sacred text of India.
The passage begins with a description of Pragâpati
(the creator) and Agni (the fire he created). When
Agni turns toward Pragâpati with open mouth, the
creator is terrified that he might be devoured by
his creation. But then, through a series of ritual
offerings, Pragâpati reproduces himself, new gods
are born, trees spring forth, songs are sung, and
Agni too is reborn. The painting seems to express
Jung’s fears and passions, as well as his attitude of
reverence toward the creative activity of the
psyche. Many years later he wrote: ‘I hit upon this
stream of lava, and the heat of its fires reshaped
my life’ (see p. 41, below).

In closing, I want to acknowledge the heirs of C. G.
Jung and their representative Leo La Rosa for
permission to publish this anthology and for useful
remarks that helped clarify certain aspects of the
work. Finally, I express profound gratitude to the


                         17
memory and spirit of C. G. Jung for his magnificent
contribution.

J.C.




                        18
Introduction

It is a great pleasure to introduce this volume of
Jung’s writings on active imagination. For many
years, people have had to search throughout the
Collected Works and elsewhere, to identify and then
read and read again these marvelous papers. Now
for the first time they are gathered together for
publication.

My task is to present Jung’s ideas about active
imagination as clearly as possible and set them in
context. Jung’s analytic method is based on the
natural healing function of the imagination, so
there are obviously many ways to express it. All
the creative art psychotherapies (art, dance, music,
drama, poetry) as well as Sandplay can trace their
roots to Jung’s early contribution. I begin with
Jung’s discovery of active imagination and then go
into his ideas. An in-depth review of the post-
Jungian literature on active imagination is beyond
the scope of this work, but my discussion of Jung is
interwoven with some wonderful contributions
from Jungian authors and others. In closing, I say
something about each of Jung’s essays and then it
is time to tell the story of the Rainmaker.

CONFRONTATION WITH THE UNCONSCIOUS

Jung discovered active imagination during the
years 1913–16. Following the break with Freud in
1912–13, he was disorientated and experienced a
time of intense inner turmoil. He was able to carry
on his practice, but for three years he couldn’t get
himself to read a professional book and he
published relatively little. He suffered from
lethargy and fears; his moods threatened to
overwhelm him. He had to find a way, a method to


                        19
heal himself from within. Since he didn’t know
what to do, he decided to engage with the impulses
and images of the unconscious. In a 1925 seminar
and again in his memoirs, he tells the remarkable
story of his experiments that led to self-healing. It
all began with his rediscovery of the symbolic play
of childhood. As a middle-aged man in crisis, Jung
had lost touch with the creative spirit. A memory
floated up of a time when he was a 10- or 11-year-
old boy, deeply engrossed in building games. The
memory was filled with a rush of emotion and he
realized the child was alive. His task became clear:
He had to develop an
ongoing relationship to this lively spirit within
himself. But how was he to bridge the distance? He
decided to return in his imagination to that time
and enact the fantasies that came to him. And so
he began to play, exactly as he had when he was a
boy. The process of symbolic play led him,
inevitably, to one of his deepest complexes and he
remembered a terrifying dream from his childhood.
This startling moment came in the midst of the
building game. Just as he placed a tiny altar-stone
inside a miniature church, he remembered his
childhood nightmare about an altar. The
connection impressed him deeply. We know from
his memoirs that his religious attitude was
shattered when as a young child he came to
associate the Lord Jesus with death. Instead of the
comfort he used to feel from saying his prayers, he
began to feel distrustful and uneasy. Surrounded by
grown-ups who spoke only of a light, bright, loving
God, he could not tell anyone about his
ruminations (1961, pp. 9–14). He spent all his life
re-creating what he had lost as he developed a way
to approach the psyche with a religious attitude.
His early nightmare both expressed the problem
and pointed toward the solution. Along with
retrieving the fearful, long-buried dream, he gained


                         20
a more mature understanding of it. His energy
began to return and his thoughts clarified. He
could sense now many more fantasies stirring
within. As he continued his building game, the
fantasies came in an incessant stream.

Around the same time he began to experiment with
specific meditative procedures, various ‘rites of
entry’ to engage with his fantasies. For example, he
was sitting at his desk one day thinking over his
fears when he made the conscious decision to ‘drop
down’ into the depths. He landed on his feet and
began to explore the strange inner landscape where
he met the first of a long series of inner figures.
These fantasies seemed to personify his fears and
other powerful emotions. Over time, he realized
that when he managed to translate his emotions
into images, he was inwardly calmed and
reassured. He came to see that his task was to find
the images that are concealed in the emotions. He
continued his experiments, trying out different
ways to enter into his fantasies voluntarily:
sometimes he imagined climbing down a steep
descent; other times he imagined digging a hole,
one shovel-full of dirt at a time. With each descent,
he explored the landscape and got better
acquainted with the inner figures. He used a
number of expressive techniques (mainly writing,
drawing, painting) to give symbolic form to his
experience. Here it is important to differentiate
between symbolic expression and a state of
unconscious merging or identification. For Jung,
the great benefit of active imagination is to
‘distinguish ourselves from the unconscious
contents’ (1928b, par. 373). Even as he opened to
the unconscious and engaged with the fantasies
that arose, he made every effort to maintain a self-
reflective, conscious point of view. Another way of
saying this: He turned his curiosity toward the


                         21