suspension passes. But it would be very bad if I were to
abandon everything on account of this obstacle. And so it isn't
good for us to be disturbed by our thoughts, nor should we be
concerned. If the devil causes them, they will cease with this
suspension. If they come, as they do, from the misery, among
many other miseries, inherited through the sin of Adam, let us
be patient and endure them for the love of God since we are
likewise subject to eating and sleeping without being able to
avoid it, which is quite a trial.
      1 2. Let us recognize our misery and desire to go where no
one will taunt us, for sometimes I recall having heard these
words the bride says in the Canticle.13 And indeed I don't find
in all of life anything about which they can be more rightly
said. It sems to me that all the contempt and trials one can
endure in life cannot be compared to these interior battles. Any
disquiet and war can be suffered if we find peace where we
live, as I have already said. 14 But that we desire to rest from the
thousand trials there are in the world and that the Lord wants
to prepare us for tranquillity and that within ourselves lies the
obstacle to such rest and tranquillity cannot fail to be very
painful and almost unbearable. So, Lord, bring us to the place
where these miseries will not taunt us, for they seem some­
times to be making fun of the soul. Even in this life, the Lord
frees the soul from these miseries when it reaches the last
dwelling place, as we shall say later if God wills. 1 s
      1 3 . These miseries will not afflict or assail everyone as
much as they did me for many years because of my wretched­
ness. It seems that I myself wanted to take vengeance on
myself. And since it was something so painful for me, I think
perhaps that it will be so for you too. And I so often speak of it
here and there that I might sometime succeed in explaining to
you that it is an unavoidable thing and should not be a distur­
bance or affliction for you but that we must let the millclapper
go clacking on, and must continue grinding our flour and not
fail to work with the will and the intellect.
      14. There is a more and a less to this obstacle in accor­
dance with one's health and age. Let the poor soul suffer even
though it has no fault in this; we have other faults, which
makes it right for us to practice patience. And since our read­
ing and the counsels we receive (that is, to pay no attention to
                                 72
                    THE INTERIOR CASTLE

these thoughts) don't suffice, I don't think that the time spent
in explaining these things for those of you with little knowl­
edge and consoling you in this matter is time lost. But until the
Lord wants to enlighten us, these counsels will be of little help.
Yet, it is necessary and His Majesty wishes us to take the means
and understand ourselves; and let's not blame the soul for what
a weak imagination, nature, and the devil cause.

                          CHAPTER Two
     Continues on the same subject and explains through a comparison
the nature of spiritual delight and how this is attained by not seeking
it.
     1 . God help me with what I have undertaken! I've already
forgot what I was dealing with, for business matters and poor
health have forced me to set this work aside just when I was at
my best; and since I have a poor memory everything will come
out confused because I can't go back to read it over. And
perhaps even everything else I say is confused; at least that's
what I feel it is.
     It seems to me I have explained the nature of consolations
in the spiritual life. 1 Since they are sometimes mixed with our
own passions, they are the occasion of loud sobbing; and I have
heard some persons say they experience a tightening in the
chest and even external bodily movements that they cannot
restrain. The force of these passions can cause nosebleeds and
other things just as painful. I don't know how to explain
anything about these experiences because I haven't had any.
But they must nonetheless be consoling, for, as I'm saying,2 the
whole experience ends in the desire to please God and enjoy
His Majesty's company.
     2. The experiences that I call spiritual delight in God, that
I termed elsewhere the prayer of quiet,3 are of a very different
kind, as those of you who by the mercy of God have experi­
enced them· will know. Let's consider, for a better understand­
ing, that we see two founts with two water troughs. (For I
don't find anything more appropriate to explain some spiritual
experiences than water; and this is because I know little and
have no helpful cleverness of mind and am so fond of this
element that I have observed it more attentively than other
                                   73
                     TERESA OF A VILA

things. In all the things that so great and wise a God has
created there must be many beneficial secrets, and those who
understand them do benefit, although I believe that in each
little thing created by God there is more than what is under­
stood, even if it is a little ant.)
      3 . These two troughs are filled with water in different
ways; with one the water comes from far away through many
aqueducts and the use of much ingenuity; with the other the
source of the water is right there, and the trough fills without
any noise. If the spring is abundant, as is this one we are
speaking about, the water overflows once the trough is filled,
forming a large stream. There is no need of any skill, nor does
the building of aqueducts have to continue; but water is always
flowing from the spring.
      The water coming from the aqueducts is comparable, in
my opinion, to the consolations I mentioned4 that are drawn
from meditation. For we obtain them through thoughts, assist­
ing ourselves, using creatures to help our meditation, and
tiring the intellect. Since, in the end, the consolation comes
through our own efforts, noise is made when there has to be
some replenishing of the benefits the consolation causes in the
soul, as has been said. s
      4. With this other fount, the water comes from its own
source, which is God. And since His Majesty desires to do so­
when He is pleased to grant some supernatural favor-He
produces this delight with the greatest peace and quiet and
sweetness in the very interior part of ourselves. I don't know
from where or how, nor is that happiness and delight experi­
enced as are earthly consolations in the heart. I mean there is
no similarity at the beginning, for afterward the delight fills
everything; this water overflows through all the dwelling
places and faculties until reaching the body. That is why I said6
that it begins in God and ends in ourselves. For, certainly, as
anyone who may have experienced it will see, the whole exteri­
or man enjoys this spiritual delight and sweetness.
      5. I was now thinking, while writing this, that the verse
mentioned above, Dilatasti cor meum, 7 says the heart was ex­
panded. I don't think the experience is something, as I say, that
rises from the heart, but from another part still more interior,
as from something deep. I think this must be the center of the
                               74
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE