CHAPTER ONE
     Discusses the importance ofperseverance if one is to reach the final
dwelling places; the great war the devil wages; and the importance of
taking the right road from the beginning. Offers a remedy that has
proved very efficacious.
     1 . Now let us speak about the type of soul that enters the
second dwelling places and what such a soul does in them. I'd
like to say only a little, for I have spoken at length on this
subject elsewhere. 1 And it would be impossible to avoid repeat­
ing much of it, for I don't remember a thing of what I said. If I
could present the matter for you in a variety of ways, I know
well that you wouldn't be annoyed since we never tire of
books-as many as there are-that deal with it.
     2. This stage pertains to those who have already begun to
practice prayer and have understood how important it is not to
stay in the first dwelling places. But they still don't have the
determination to remain in this second stage without turning
back, for they don't avoid the occasions of sin. This failure to
avoid these occasions is quite dangerous. But these persons
have received a good deal of mercy in that they sometimes do
strive to escape from snakes and poisonous creatures, and they
understand that it is good to avoid them.
     These rooms, in part, involve much more effort than do
the first, even though there is not as much danger, for it now
seems that souls in them recognize the dangers, and there is
great hope they will enter further into the castle. I say that
                                   48
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

these rooms involve more effort because those who are in the
first dwelling places are like deaf-mutes and thus the difficulty
of not speaking is more easily endured by them than it is by
those who hear but cannot speak. Yet, not for this reason does
one have greater desire to be deaf, for after all it is a wonderful
thing to hear what is being said to us. So these persons are able
to hear the Lord's callings. Since they are getting closer to
where His Majesty dwells, He is a very good neighbor. His
mercy and goodness are so bountiful, whereas we are occupied
in our pastimes, business affairs, pleasures, and worldly buying
and selling, and still falling into sin and rising again. These
beasts are so poisonous and their presence so dangerous and
noisy that it would be a wonder if we kept from stumbling and
falling over them. Yet this Lord desires intensely that we love
Him and seek His company, so much so that from time to time
He calls us to draw near Him. And His voice is so sweet the
poor soul dissolves at not doing immediately what He com­
mands. Thus, as I say, hearing His voice is a greater trial than
not hearing it.
      3. I don't mean that these appeals and calls are like the
ones I shall speak of later on.2 But they come through words
spoken by other good people, or through sermons, or through
what is read in good books, or through the many things that are
heard and by which God calls, or through illnesses and trials,
or also through a truth that He teaches during the brief mo­
ments we spend in prayer; however lukewarm these moments
may be, God esteems them highly. And you, Sisters, don't
underestimate this first favor, nor should you become disconso­
late if you don't respond at once to the Lord. His Majesty
knows well how to wait many days and years, especially when
He sees perseverance and good desires. This perseverance is
most necessary here. One always gains much through persever­
ance. But the attacks made by devils in a thousand ways afflict
the soul more in these rooms than in the previous ones. In the
previous ones the soul was deaf and dumb-at least it heard
very little and resisted less, as one who has partly lost hope of
conquering. Here the intellect is more alive and the faculties
more skilled. The blows from the artillery strike in such a way
that the soul cannot fail to hear. It is in this stage that the devils
represent these snakes (worldly things) and the temporal plea-
                                 49
                       TERESA OF AVILA

sures of the present as though almost eternal. They bring to
mind the esteem one has in the world, one's friends and rela­
tives, one's health (when there's thought of penitential prac­
tices, for the soul that enters this dwelling place always begins
wanting to practice some penance) and a thousand other obsta­
cles.
      4. 0 Jesus, what an uproar the devils instigate here! And
the afflictions of the poor soul: It doesn't know whether to
continue or to return to the first room. Reason, for its part,
shows the soul that it is mistaken in thinking that these things
of the world are not worth anything when compared to what it
is aiming after. Faith, however, teaches it about where it will
find fulfillment. The memory shows it where all these things
end, holding before it the death of those who found great joy in
them. Through the memory it sees how some have suffered
sudden death, how quickly they are forgotten by all. Some
whom it had known in great prosperity are under the ground,
and their graves are walked on. This soul itself has often passed
by these graves. It reflects that many worms are swarming over
the corpses, and thinks about numerous other things. The will
is inclined to love after seeing such countless signs of love; it
would want to repay something; it especially keeps in mind
how this true Lover never leaves it, accompanying it and
giving it life and being. Then the intellect helps it realize that it
couldn't find a better friend, even were it to live for many
years; that the whole world is filled with falsehood; and that so
too these joys the devil gives it are filled with trials, cares, and
contradictions. The intellect tells the soul of its certainty that
outside this castle neither security nor peace will be found, that
it should avoid going about to strange houses since its own is so
filled with blessings to be enjoyed if it wants. The intellect will
ask who it is that finds everything he needs in his own house
and, especially, has a guest who will make him lord over all
goods provided that he wills to avoid going astray like the
prodigal son and eating the husks of swine.3
      5. These are reasons for conquering the devils. But, oh,
my Lord and my God, how the whole world's habit of getting
involved in vanities vitiates everything! Our faith is so dead
that we desire what we see more than what faith tells us. And,
indeed, we see only a lot of misfortune in those who go after
                                 50
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE