experiences, for if the locutions are from God, doing so is a
greater help toward progress, and a person even grows when
tested. This is true; nonetheless, one should not proceed in a
way that is distressing or disturbing to a soul, because truly the
soul can't help it if these locutions come.
     4. Now then, to return to what I was saying about locu­
tions, all the kinds I mentioned3 can be from God or from the
devil or from one's own imagination. If I can manage to do so, I
shall give, with the help of the Lord, the signs as to when they
come from these different sources and when they are danger­
ous; for there are many souls among prayerful people who hear
them. My desire, Sisters, is that you realize you are doing the
right thing if you refuse to give credence to them, even when
they are destined just for you (such as some consolation, or
advice about your faults), no matter who tells you about them,
or if they are an illusion, for it doesn't matter where they come
from. One thing I advise you: do not think, even if the locu­
tions are from God, that you are better because of them, for He
spoke frequently with the Pharisees. All the good comes from
how one benefits by these words; and pay no more attention to
those that are not in close conformity with Scripture than you
would to those heard from the devil himself. Even if they come
from your weak imagination, it's necessary to treat them as if
they were temptations in matters of faith, and thus resist them
always. They will then go away because they will have little
effect on you.
      5. Returning, then, to the first of the different kinds of
locutions; whether or not the words come from the interior
part of the soul, from the superior part, or from the exterior
part doesn't matter in discerning whether or not they are from
God. The surest signs they are from God that can be had, in
my opinion, are these: the first and truest is the power and
authority they bear, for locutions from God effect what they
say. Let me explain myself better. A soul finds itself in the
midst of all the tribulation and disturbance that was men­
tioned,4 in darkness of the intellect and in dryness; with one
word alone of these that the Lord says ("don't be distressed"), it
is left calm and free from all distress, with great light, and
without all that suffering in which it seemed to it that all the
learned men and all who might come together to give it reasons
                                1 20
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

for not being distressed would be unable to remove its afflic­
tion no matter how hard they tried. Or, it is afflicted because
its confessor and others have told it that its spirit is from the
devil, and it is all full of fear; with one word alone ("It is I, fear
not"), the fear is taken away completely, and the soul is most
comforted, thinking that nothing would be sufficient to make it
believe anything else. Or, it is greatly distressed over how
certain serious business matters will turn out; it hears that it
should be calm, that everything will turn out all right. It is left
certain and free of amdety. And this is the way in many other
instances. 5
     6. The second sign is the great quiet left in the soul, the
devout and peaceful recollection, the readiness to engage in the
praises of God. 0 Lord, if a word sent to be spoken through
one of Your attendants (for the Lord Himself does not speak
the words-at least not in this dwelling place-but an angel)
has such power, what will be the power You leave in the soul
that is attached to You, and You to it, through love?
     7. The third sign is that these words remain in the memo­
ry for a very long time, and some are never forgotten, as are
those we listen to here on earth-1 mean those we hear from
men. For even if the words are spoken by men who are very
important and learned, or concern the future, we do not have
them engraved on our memory, or believe them, as we do these.
The certitude is so strong that even in things that in one's own
opinion sometimes seem impossible and there is doubt as to
whether they will or will not happen, and the intellect wavers,
there is an assurance in the soul itself that cannot be overcome.
Even though it seems that everything is going contrary to what
the soul understood, and years go by, the thought remains that
God will find other means than those men know of and that in
the end the words will be accomplished; and so they are.
Although, as I say, the soul still suffers when it sees the many
delays, for since time has passed since it heard the words, and
the effects and the certitude that were present about their
being from God have passed, these doubts take place. The soul
wonders whether the locutions might have come from the devil
or from the imagination. Yet, none of these doubts remain in
the soul, but it would at present die a thousand deaths for that
truth. But, as I say, what won't the devil do with all these
                                 121
                       TERESA OF AVILA

imaginings so as to afflict and intimidate the soul, especially if
the words regard a business matter that when carried out will
bring many blessings to souls, and works that will bring great
honor and service to God, and if there is great difficulty
involved? At least he weakens faith, for it does great harm not
to believe that God has the power to do things that our intel­
lects do not understand.
      8. Despite all these struggles and even the persons who
tell one that the locutions are foolishness (I mean the confessors
with whom one speaks about these things), and despite the
many unfortunate occurrences that make it seem the words
will not be fulfilled, there remains a spark of assurance so
alive-1 don't know from where-that the words will be ful­
filled, though all other hopes are dead, that even should the
soul desire otherwise, that spark will stay alive. And in the end,
as I have said,6 the words of the Lord are fulfilled, and the soul
is so consoled and happy that it wouldn't want to do anything
but always praise His Majesty and praise Him more for the fact
that what He had told it was fulfilled than for the work itself,
no matter how important the work is to the soul.
      9. I don't know why it is so important to the soul that
these words turn out to be true, for if that soul were itself
caught in some lies, I don't think it would regret the fact as
much. And yet, there is nothing else it can do, for it merely
says what it hears. Countless times, in this regard, a certain
person thought of how the prophet Jonah feared that Nineveh
would not be destroyed.7 In sum, since the spirit is from God,
it is right that the soul be faithful in its desire that the words be
considered true, for God is the supreme truth. And so its
happiness is great when through a thousand roundabout ways
and in most difficult circumstances it sees them fulfilled. Even
though great trials should come to the person herself from
them, she would rather suffer such trials than the trial of seeing
that what the Lord told her fails in fact to happen. Perhaps not
all persons will have this weakness-if it is a weakness, for I
cannot condemn it as bad.
      10. If the locutions come from the imagination, there are
none of these signs; neither certitude, nor peace, nor interior
delight. But it could happen-and I even know some persons to
whom it has happened-that while these imaginings come a
                                 122
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE