deep concern about avoiding anything displeasing to Him, for
it seemed to her that He was always looking at her. And each
time she wanted to speak with His Majesty in prayer, and even
outside of it, she felt He was so near that He couldn't fail to
hear her. But she didn't hear words spoken whenever she
wanted; only unexpectedly when they were necessary. She felt
He was walking at her right side, but she didn't experience this
with those senses by which we can know that a person is beside
us. This vision comes in another unexplainable, more delicate
way. But it is so certain and leaves much certitude; even much
more than the other visions do because in the visions that come
through the senses one can be deceived, but not in the intellec­
tual vision. For this latter brings great interior benefits and
effects that couldn't be present if the experience were caused
by melancholy; nor would the devil produce so much good; nor
would the soul go about with such peace and continual desires
to please God, and with so much contempt for everything that
does not bring it to Him. Afterward she understood clearly
that the vision was not caused by the devil, which became more
and more clear as time went on.
     4. Nonetheless, I know that at times she went about very
much frightened; other times, with the most intense confusion,
for she didn't know why so much good had come to her. We
were so united, she and I, that nothing took place in her soul of
which I was ignorant; so I can be a good witness, and believe
me all I have said of this matter is the truth.
     It is a favor from the Lord that she bears in herself the
most intense confusion and humility. If the vision were from
the devil, the effects would be contrary. And since the vision is
something definitely understood to be a gift from God and
human effort would not be sufficient to produce this experi­
ence, the one who receives it can in no way think it is his own
good but a good given through the hand of God. And even
though, in my opinion, some of those favors that were men­
tioned are greater, this favor bears with it a particular knowl­
edge of God. This continual companionship gives rise to a most
tender love for His Majesty, to some desires even greater than
those mentioned5 to surrender oneself totally to His service,
and to a great purity of conscience because the presence at its
side makes the soul pay attention to everything. For even

                               1 52
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

though we already know that God is present in all we do, our
nature is such that we neglect to think of this. Here the truth
cannot be forgotten, for the Lord awakens the soul to His
presence beside it. And even the favors that were mentioned6
became much more common since the soul goes about almost
continually with actual love for the One who it sees and
understands is at its side.
     5. In sum, with respect to the soul's gain, the vision is seen
to be a most wonderful and highly valuable favor. The soul
thanks the Lord that He gives the vision without any merits on
its part and would nor exchange that blessing for any earthly
treasure or delight. Thus, when the Lord is pleased to take the
vision away, the soul feels very much alone. But all the efforts
it could possibly make are of little avail in bringing back that
companionship. The Lord gives it when He desires, and it
cannot be acquired. Sometimes also the vision is of some saint,
and this too is most beneficial.
     6. You will ask how if nothing is seen one knows that it is
Christ, or a saint, or His most glorious Mother. This, the soul
will not know how to explain, nor can it understand how it
knows, but it does know with the greatest certitude. It seems
easier for the soul to know when the Lord speaks; but what is
more amazing is that it knows the saint, who doesn't speak but
seemingly is placed there by the Lord as a help to it and as its
companion. Thus there are other spiritual things that one
doesn't know how to explain, but through them one knows
how lowly our nature is when there is question of understand­
ing the sublime grandeurs of God, for we are incapable even of
understanding these spiritual things. But let the one to whom
His Majesty gives these favors receive them with admiration
and praise for Him. Thus He grants the soul particular graces
through these favors. For since the favors are not granted to all,
they should be highly esteemed; and one should strive to per­
form greater services since God in so many ways helps the soul
to perform these services. Hence the soul doesn't consider itself
to be any greater because of this, and it thinks that it is the one
who serves God the least among all who are in the world. This
soul thinks that it is more obligated to Him than anyone, and
any fault it commits pierces to the core of its being, and very
rightly so.

                                153
                     TERESA OF AVILA

     7 . These effects from the vision that were mentioned' and
that are left in the soul can be recognized by any one of you
whom the Lord has brought by this road. Through them you
can know that the vision is not an illusion or a fancy. As I have
said, 8 I hold that it would be impossible for a vision caused by
the devil to last so long and benefit the soul so remarkably,
clothing it with so much interior peace. It is not customary for
something so evil to do something so good, nor can the devil
even though he may want to. If he could, there would at once
be some outward show of self-esteem and thought of being
better than others. But that the soul goes about always so
attached to God and with its thoughts so occupied in Him
causes the devil such rage that even though he might try he
would not often return. And God is so faithful9 that He will
not allow the devil much leeway with a soul that doesn't aim
for anything else than to please His Majesty and spend its life
for His honor and glory; He will at once ordain how it may be
undeceived.
      8. My theme is and will be that since, as a result of these
favors from God, the soul walks in the way here mentioned,
His Majesty will make it be the one to gain. And if He some­
times permits the devil to tempt the soul, He will so ordain that
the evil one will be defeated. As a result, daughters, if someone
should walk along this road, as I have said, do not be aston­
ished. It is good that there be fear and that we walk with more
care. Nor should you be self-confident, for since you are so
favored you could grow more careless. If you do not see in
yourselves the effects that were mentioned, 10 it will be a sign
that the favor is not from God. It is good that at the beginning
you speak about this vision under the seal of confession with a
very learned man, for learned men will give us light. Or, with
some very spiritual person, if there be one available; if there
isn't, it's better to speak with a very learned man. Or with both
a spiritual person and a learned man if both are at hand. And
should they tell you the vision is fancied, do not be concerned,
for the fancy can do little good or evil. Commend yourself to
the divine Majesty that He not let you be deceived. If they
should tell you that your vision is from the devil, it will be a
greater trial, although no one will say this if he is indeed


                               1 54
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE