Continues on the same topic; deals with dryness in prayer; with
what, in her opinion, might take place at this stage; how it is necessary
to test ourselves; and with the fact that the Lord does try those who are
in these dwelling places.
      1 . I have known some souls and even many-I believe I
can say-who have reached this state and have lived many
years in this righteous and well ordered way both in body and
soul, insofar as can be known. After these years, when it seems
they have become lords of the world, at least clearly disillu­
sioned in its regard, His Majesty will try them in some minor
matters, and they will go about so disturbed and afflicted that it
puzzles me and even makes me fearful. It's useless to give them
advice, for since they have engaged so long in the practice of
virtue they think that they can teach others and that they are
more than justified in feeling disturbed.
      2. In sum, I have found neither a way of consoling nor a
cure for such persons other than to show them compassion in
their affliction-and, indeed, compassion is felt on seeing them
subject to so much misery-and not contradict their reasoning.
For everything in their minds leads them to think they are
suffering these things for God, and so they don't come to
realize that their disturbance is an imperfection. This is an­
other mistake of persons so advanced. There is no reason for us
to be surprised at what they experience, although I do think
the feeling stirred by such things should pass quickly. For God
often desires that His chosen ones feel their wretchedness, and
He withdraws His favor a little. No more is necessary, for I
would wager that we'd then soon get to know ourselves. The
nature of this trial is immediately understood, for they recog­
nize their fault very clearly. Sometimes, seeing their fault
distresses them more than the thing that disturbs them, for
unable to help themselves they are affected by earthly happen­
ings even though these may not be very burdensome. This
distress, I think, is a great mercy from God; and although it is a
defect, it is very beneficial for humility.
      3 . As for the persons I am speaking about, this is not so.
But, as I have said, they canonize these feelings in their minds
and would like others to do so. I want to mention some of these
                                   60
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

feelings so that we may understand and test ourselves before
the Lord tests us. It is very important to be prepared and to
 have understood ourselves beforehand.
     4. A rich person without children or anyone for whom he
 might want his possessions happens to lose his wealth, but not
to such an extent that he lacks necessities for himself and for
the management of his household; he even has a surplus. If he
should go about as worried and disturbed as he would be if not
even a piece of bread were left, how can our Lord ask him to
 leave all for Him? 1 Here the person makes the excuse that he
feels the way he does because he wants these things for the
poor. But I believe that God has a greater desire that such a
 person conform to the divine will and that, though this person
 may try to procure such wealth, he keep his soul at rest rather
than worry about charity of such a kind. And if the person
doesn't do this, because the Lord has not brought him so far,
 well and good; but he should understand that he lacks this
freedom of spirit. And because the Lord will ask him for it, he
should prepare himself so that the Lord may give it to him; he
will be asking His Majesty for it.
     A person has plenty to eat and even a surplus; the opportu­
nity presents itself for him to acquire more wealth; all right, let
him do so if it is offered to him. But if he strives for wealth and
after possessing it strives for more and more, however good the
intention may be (for he should have it because, as I have said, 2
these are virtuous persons of prayer), he need have no fear of
ascending to the dwelling places closest to the King.
     5. There is a similar occurrence when an opportunity
presents itself for these persons to be despised or to lose a little
honor. God often grants them the favor of enduring such a
thing, for He is very fond of favoring virtue publicly so that
virtue itself will not undergo a loss of esteem. Or He will also
do so because they have served Him, for this Beloved of ours is
very good. But now they are left in such disquiet that they
cannot help themselves, nor can they quickly get rid of this
disturbance. God help me! Aren't these the ones who for a long
while now have considered how the Lord suffered and how
good suffering is, and who have desired it? They would like
everyone to live a life as well ordered as they do; and please
God they will not think their grief is for the faults of others
                                 61
                      TERESA OF AVILA

and in their minds turn it into something meritorious.
     6. It must seem to you, Sisters, that I'm not staying on the
subject or not speaking to you, for these things don't take place
here. Neither do we have wealth nor do we desire or strive for
it, nor does anyone do injury to us. As a result the examples are
not relevant to us. But from these examples many lessons can
be learned about things it would not be good to single out, nor
would there be reason to do so. Through the above examples
you will understand whether or not you are truly stripped of
what you have left behind. For little things happen, even
though not of this kind, in which you can very well test and
know whether or not you are the rulers of your passions. And
believe me the whole affair lies not in whether we wear the
religious habit but in striving to practice the virtues, in surren­
dering our will to God in everything, in bringing our life into
accordance with what His Majesty ordains for it, and in desir­
ing that His will not ours be done.3 Since we may not have
reached this stage-humility, as I have said!4 Humility is the
ointment for our wounds because if we indeed have humility,
even though there may be a time of delay, the surgeon, who is
our Lord, will come to heal us.
      7. The penance these souls do is well balanced, like their
lives. They desire penance a great deal so as to serve our Lord
by it. Nothing of this is wrong, and thus they are very discreet
in doing it in a way so as not to harm their health. Have no fear
that they will kill themselves, for their reason is still very much
in control. Love has not yet reached the point of overwhelming
reason. But I should like us to use our reason to make ourselves
dissatisfied with this way of serving God, always going step by
step, for we'll never finish this journey. And since, in our
opinion, we are continually walking and are tired (for, believe
me, it is a wearisome journey), we will be doing quite well if
we don't go astray. But does it seem to you, daughters, that if
we could go from one land to another in eight days, it would be
good to take a year through wind, snow, rain, and bad roads?
Wouldn't it be better to make the journey all at once? For all
these obstacles are present, as well as danger from snakes. Oh,
what good proofs I could give of these things. And please God I
may have passed beyond this stage, for often enough it seems to
me I haven't.
                                62
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE