2. Indeed, sometimes I reflect and fear that if a soul knew
beforehand, its natural weakness would find it most difficult to
have the determination to suffer and pass through these trials,
no matter what blessings were represented to it-unless it had
arrived at the seventh dwelling place. For once it has arrived
there, the soul fears nothing and is absolutely determined to
overcome every obstacle for God.3 And the reason is that it is
always so closely joined to His Majesty that from this union
comes its fortitude. I believe it will be well to recount some of
those trials that I know one will certainly undergo. Perhaps not
all souls will be led along this path, although I doubt very
much that those persons who sometimes enjoy so truly the
things of heaven will live free of earthly trials that come in one
way or another.
     3 . Although I hadn't intended to treat of these, I thought
doing so would bring great consolation to some soul going
through them, for it would learn that these trials take place in
souls to whom God grants similar favors; for truly when one is
suffering the trials, it then seems that everything is lost. I will
not deal with them according to the order in which they
happen, but as they come to mind. And I want to begin with
the smallest trials. There is an outcry by persons a Sister is
dealing with and even by those she does not deal with and who,
it seems to her, would never even think of her; gossip like the
following: "She's trying to make out she's a saint; she goes to
extremes to deceive the world and bring others to ruin; there
are other better Christians who don't put on all this outward
show." (And it's worth noting that she is not putting on any
outward show but j ust striving to fulfill well her state in life.)
Those she considered her friends turn away from her, and they
are the ones who take the largest and most painful bite at her,
"That soul has gone astray and is clearly mistaken; these are
things of the devil; she will turn out like this person or that
other that went astray, and will bring about a decline in
virtue; she has deceived her confessors" (and they go to these
confessors, telling them so, giving them examples of what
happened to some that were lost in this way); a thousand kinds
of ridicule and sayings like the above.
     4. I know a person who had great fear that there would be


                                1 09
                       TERESA OF AVILA

no one who would hear her confession because of such gos­
sip4-so much gossip that there's no reason to go into it all
here. And what is worse these things do not pass quickly, but
go on throughout the person's whole life including the advice
to others to avoid any dealings with such persons.
     You will tell me that there are also those who will speak
well of that soul. 0 daughters, how few there are who believe
in such favors in comparison with the many who denigrate
them! Moreover, praise is just another trial greater than those
mentioned! Since the soul sees clearly that if it has anything
good this is given by God and is by no means its own-for just
previously it saw itself to be very poor and surrounded by great
sins-praise is an intolerable burden to it, at least in the begin­
ning. Later on, for certain reasons, praise is not so intolerable.
First, because experience makes the soul see clearly that people
are as quick to say good things as bad, and so it pays no more
attention to the good things than to the bad. Second, because it
has been more enlightened by the Lord that no good thing
comes from itself but is given by His Majesty; and it turns to
praise God, forgetful that it has had any part to play, just as if it
had seen the gift in another person. Third, if it sees that some
souls have benefitted from seeing the favors God grants it, it
thinks that His Majesty used this means, of its being falsely
esteemed as good, so that some blessings might come to those
souls. Fourth, since it looks after the honor and glory of God
more than its own, the temptation, which came in the begin­
ning, that these praises will destroy it is removed; little does
dishonor matter to it if in exchange God might perhaps there­
by just once be praised-afterward, let whatever comes come.
     5. These reasons and others mitigate the great pain these
praises cause, although some pain is almost always felt, except
when one is paying hardly any attention. But it is an incompa­
rably greater trial to see oneself publicly considered as good
without reason than the trials mentioned. And when the soul
reaches the stage at which it pays little attention to praise, it
pays much less to disapproval; on the contrary, it rejoices in
this and finds it a very sweet music. This is an amazing truth.
Blame does not intimidate the soul but strengthens it. Experi­
ence has already taught it the wonderful gain that comes
through this path. It feels that those who persecute it do not
                                 1 10
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

offend God; rather that His Majesty permits persecution for
the benefit of the soul. And since it clearly experiences the
benefits of persecution, it acquires a special and very tender
love for its persecutors. It seems to it that they are greater
friends and more advantageous than those who speak well of it.
      6. The Lord is wont also to send it the severest illnesses.
This is a much greater trial, especially when the pains are
acute. For, in some way, if these pains are severe, the trial is, it
seems to me, the greatest on earth-I mean the greatest exterior
trial, however many the other pains. I say "if the pains are
severe, " because they then afflict the soul interiorly and exteri­
orly in such a way that it doesn't know what to do with itself.
It would willingly accept at once any martyrdom rather than
these sharp pains, although they do not last long in this ex­
treme form. After all, God gives no more than what can be
endured; and His Majesty gives patience first. But other great
sufferings and illnesses of many kinds are the usual thing.
      7. I know a person who cannot truthfully say that from
the time the Lord began forty years ago to grant the favor that
was mentioned she spent even one day without pains and other
kinds of suffering (from lack of bodily health, I mean) and
other great trials.5 It's true that she had been very wretched
and that everything seemed small to her in comparison with
the hell she deserved. Others, who have not offended our Lord
so much, will be led by another path. But I would always
choose the path of suffering, if only to imitate our Lord Jesus
Christ if there were no other gains, especially since there are
always so many other things to gain.
     Oh, were we to treat of interior sufferings these others
would seem small if the interior ones could be clearly ex­
plained; but it is impossible to explain the way in which they
come to pass.
      8. Let us begin with the torment one meets with from a
confessor who is so discreet and has so little experience that
there is nothing he is sure of: He fears everything and finds in
everything something to doubt because he sees these unusual
experiences. He becomes especially doubtful if he notices some
imperfection in a soul that has them, for it seems to such
confessors that the ones to whom God grants these favors must
be angels-but that is impossible as long as they are in this
                                111
                      TERESA OF AVILA