harmed by knowing that God can grant this favor in this exile
would be very much lacking in humility and love of neighbor.
Otherwise, how could we fail to be happy that God grants
these favors to our brother? His doing so is no impediment
toward His granting them to us-, and His Majesty can reveal
His grandeurs to whomever He wants. Sometimes He does so
merely to show forth His glory, as He said of the blind man
whose sight He restored when His apostles asked Him if the
blindness resulted from the man's sins or those of his parents.5
Hence, He doesn't grant them because the sanctity of the
recipients is greater than that of those who don't receive them
but so that His glory may be known, as we see in Saint Paul
and the Magdalene, and that we might praise Him for His
work in creatures.
    4. One could say that these favors seem to be impossible
and that it is good not to scandalize the weak. Less is lost when
the weak do not believe in them than when the favors fail to
benefit those to whom God grants them; and these latter will
be delighted and awakened through these favors to a greater
love of Him who grants so many gifts and whose power and
majesty are so great. Moreover, I know I am speaking to those
for whom this danger does not exist, for they know and believe
that God grants even greater signs of His love. I know that
whoever does not believe in these favors will have no experi­
ence of them, for God doesn't like us to put a limit on His
works. And so, Sisters, those of you whom the Lord doesn't
lead by this path should never doubt His generosity.
     5. Well, getting back to our beautiful and delightful castle
we must see how we can enter it. It seems I'm saying some­
thing foolish. For if this castle is the soul, clearly one doesn't
have to enter it since it is within oneself. How foolish it would
seem were we to tell someone to enter a room he is already in.
But you must understand that there is a great difference in the
ways one may be inside the castle. For there are many souls
who are in the outer courtyard-which is where the guards
stay-and don't care at all about entering the castle, nor do
they know what lies within that most precious place, nor who
is within, nor even how many rooms it has. You have already
heard in some books on prayer that the soul is advised to enter
within itself;6 well that's the very thing I'm advising.
                                37
                     TERESA OF AVILA

     6. Not long ago a very learned man told me that souls who
do not practice prayer are like people with paralyzed or crip­
pled bodies; even though they have hands and feet they cannot
give orders to these hands and feet. 7 Thus there are souls so ill
and so accustomed to being involved in external matters that
there is no remedy, nor does it seem they can enter within
themselves. They are now so used to dealing always with the
insects and vermin that are in the wall surrounding the castle
that they have become almost like them. And though they have
so rich a nature and the power to converse with none other
than God, there is no remedy. If these souls do not strive to
understand and cure their great misery, they will be changed
into statues of salt, unable to turn their heads to look at them­
selves, just as Lot's wife was changed for having turned her
head.8
     7. Insofar as I can understand, the gate of entry to this
castle is prayer and reflection. I don't mean to refer to mental
more than vocal prayer, for since vocal prayer is prayer it must
be accompanied by reflection. A prayer in which a person is
not aware of whom he is speaking to, what he is asking, who it
is who is asking and of whom, I do not call prayer however
much the lips may move. Sometimes it will be so without this
reflection, provided that the soul has these reflections at other
times. Nonetheless, anyone who has the habit of speaking
before God's majesty as though he were speaking to a slave,
without being careful to see how he is speaking, but saying
whatever comes to his head and whatever he has learned from
saying at other times, in my opinion is not praying. Please
God, may no Christian pray in this way. Among yourselves,
Sisters, I hope in His Majesty that you will not do so, for the
custom you have of being occupied with interior things is quite
a good safeguard against falling and carrying on in this way
like brute beasts.
     8. Well now, we are not speaking to these crippled souls,
for if the Lord Himself doesn't come to order them to get up­
as He did the man who waited at the side of the pool for thirty
years9-they are quite unfortunate and in serious danger. But
we are speaking to other souls that, in the end, enter the castle.
For even though they are very involved in the world, they have
good desires and sometimes, though only once in a while, they
                                38
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

entrust themselves to our Lord and reflect on who they are,
although in a rather hurried fashion. During the period of a
month they will sometimes pray, but their minds are then
filled with business matters that ordinarily occupy them. They
are so attached to these things that where their treasure lies
their heart goes also.10 Sometimes they do put all these things
aside, and the self-knowledge and awareness that they are not
proceeding correctly in order to get to the door is important.
Finally, they enter the first, lower rooms. But so many reptiles
get in with them that they are prevented from seeing the
beauty of the castle and from calming down; they have done
quite a bit just by having entered.
     9. You may have been thinking, daughters, that this is
irrelevant to you since by the Lord's goodness you are not
among these people. You'll have to have patience, for I
wouldn't know how to explain my understanding of some
interior things about prayer if not in this way. And may it even
please the Lord that I succeed in saying something, for what I
want to explain to you is very difficult to understand without
experience. If you have experience you will see that one cannot
avoid touching upon things that-please God, through His
mercy-do not pertain to us.

                          CHAPTER Two
      Treats of how ugly a soul is when in mortal sin and how God
wanted to let a certain person know something about this. Discusses,
also, some matters on the theme of self-knowledge. This chapter is
beneficial, for there are noteworthy points. Explains what is meant by
these dwelling places.
      1 . Before going on I want to say that you should consider
what it would mean to this so brilliantly shining and beautiful
castle, this pearl from the Orient, this tree of life planted in the
very living waters of life1-that is, in God-to fall into mortal
sin; there's no darker darkness nor anything more obscure and
black. You shouldn't want to know anything else than the fact
that, although the very sun that gave the soul so much bril­
liance and beauty is still in the center, the soul is as though it
were not there to share in these things. Yet, it is as capable of
enjoying His Majesty as is crystal capable of reflecting the sun's
                                  39
                      TERESA OF AVILA