common. Wherefore I said10 that interior things are seen in
such a way that one understands with certitude that there is
some kind of difference, a difference clearly recognized, be­
tween the soul and the spirit, even though they are both one.
So delicate a division is perceived that sometimes it seems the
one functions differently from the other, and so does the savor
the Lord desires to give them seem different. It also seems to
me that the soul and the faculties are not one but different.
There are so many and such delicate things in the interior that
it would be boldness on my part to set out to explain them. In
heaven we will see l:!ll this, if the Lord in His mercy grants us
the favor of bringing us there where we shall understand these
secrets.

                         CHAPTER Two
      Continues on the same subject. Explains the difference between
spiritual union and spiritual marriage. Describes this difference
through some delicate comparisons.
      1 . Now then let us deal with the divine and spiritual
marriage , although this great favor does not come to its perfect
fullness as long as we live; for if we were to withdraw from
God, this remarkable blessing would be lost.
      The first time the favor is granted, His Majesty desires to
show Himself to the soul through an imaginative vision of His
most sacred humanity so that the soul will understand and not
be ignorant of receiving this sovereign gift; with other persons
the favor will be received in another form. With regard to the
one of whom we are speaking, the Lord represented Himself to
her, just after she had received Communion, in the form of
shining splendor, beauty, and majesty, as He was after His
resurrection, and told her that now it was time that she consid­
er as her own what belonged to Him and that He would take
care of what was hers, and He spoke other words destined
more to be heard than to be mentioned. 1
      2. I t may seem that this experience was nothing new since
at other times the Lord had represented Himself to the soul in
such a way. The experience was so different that it left her
indeed stupefied and frightened: first, because this vision came
with great force; second, because of the words the Lord spoke
                                1 77
                     TERESA OF AVILA

to her and also because in the interior of her soul, where He
represented Himself to her, she had not seen other visions
except the former one. 2 You must understand that there is the
greatest difference between all the previous visions and those
of this dwelling place. Between the spiritual betrothal arid the
spiritual marriage the difference is as great as that which exists
between two who are betrothed and between two who can no
longer be separated.3
     3 . I have already said4 that even though these comparisons
are used, because there are no others better suited to our
purpose, it should be understood that in this state there is no
more thought of the body than if the soul were not in it, but
one's thought is only of the spirit. In the spiritual marriage,
there is still much less remembrance of the body because this
secret union takes place in the very interior center of the soul,
which must be where God Himself is, and in my opinion there
is no need of any door for Him to enter. I say there is no need
of any door because everything that has been said up until now
seems to take place by means of the senses and faculties, and
this appearance of the humanity of the Lord must also.5 But
that which comes to pass in the union of the spiritual marriage
is very different. The Lord appears in this center of the soul,
not in an imaginative vision but in an intellectual one, although
more delicate than those mentioned,6 as He appeared to the
apostles without entering through the door when He said to
them pax vobis.1 What God communicates here to the soul in an
instant is a secret so great and a favor so sublime-and the
delight the soul experiences so extreme-that I don't know
what to compare it to. I can say only that the Lord wishes to
reveal for that moment, in a more sublime manner than
through any spiritual vision or taste, the glory of heaven. One
can say no more-insofar as can be understood-than that the
soul, I mean the spirit, is made one with God. For since His
Majesty is also spirit, He has wished to show His love for us by
giving some persons understanding of the point to which this
love reaches so that we might praise His grandeur. For He has
desired to be so joined with the creature that, just as those who
are married cannot be separated, 8 He doesn't want to be sepa­
rated from the soul.


                                178
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

     4. The spiritual betrothal is different, for the two often
separate. And the union is also different because, even though
it is the joining of two things into one, in the end the two can
be separated and each remains by itself. We observe this ordi­
narily, for the favor of union with the Lord passes quickly, and
afterward the soul remains without that company; I mean,
without awareness of it. In this other favor from the Lord, no.
The soul always remains with its God in that center. Let us say
that the union is like the joining of two wax candles to such an
extent that the flame coming from them is but one, or that the
wick, the flame, and the wax are all one. But afterward one
candle can be easily separated from the other and there are two
candles; the same holds for the wick. In the spiritual marriage
the union is like what we have when rain falls from the sky
into a river or fount; all is water, for the rain that fell from
heaven cannot be divided or separated from the water of the
river. Or it is like what we have when a little stream enters the
sea, there is no means of separating the two. Or, like the bright
light entering a room through two different windows; al­
though the streams of light are separate when entering the
room, they become one.
      5. Perhaps this is what Saint Paul means in saying He that
is joined or united to the Lord becomes one spirit with him, 9 and is
referring to this sovereign marriage, presupposing that His
Majesty has brought the soul to it through union. And he also
says: For me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.10 The soul as well, I
think, can say these words now because this state is the place
where the little butterfly we mentioned 1 1 dies, and with the
greatest joy because its life is now Christ.
      6. And that its life is Christ is understood better, with the
passing of time, by the effects this life has. Through some
secret aspirations the soul understands clearly that it is God
who gives life to our soul. These aspirations come very, very
often in such a living way that they can in no way be doubted.
The soul feels them very clearly even though they are inde­
scribable. But the feeling is so powerful that sometimes the
soul cannot avoid the loving expressions they cause, such as: 0
Life of my life! Sustenance that sustains me! and things of this
sort. For from those divine breasts where it seems God is


                                   1 79
                      TERESA OF AVILA