is all loathsome dung compared to these treasures that will be
enjoyed without end. Nor are these anything in comparison
with having as our own the Lord of all the treasures of heaven
and earth.
      1 1 . 0 human blindness! How long, how long before this
dust will be removed from our eyes! Even though among
ourselves the dust doesn't seem to be capable of blinding us
completely, I see some specks, some tiny pebbles that if we
allow them to increase will be enough to do us great harm. On
the contrary, for the love of God, Sisters, let us benefit by these
faults so as to know our misery, and they will give us clearer
vision as did the mud to the blind man cured by our Spouse. 13
Thus, seeing ourselves so imperfect, let us increase our suppli­
cations that His Majesty may draw good out of our miseries so
that we might be pleasing to Him.
      1 2 . I have digressed a great deal without realizing it. Par­
don me, Sisters, and believe me that having reached these
grandeurs of God (I mean, reached the place where I must
speak of them), I cannot help but feel very sorry to see what we
lose through our own fault. Even though it is true that these
are blessings the Lord gives to whomever He wills, His Majes­
ty would give them all to us if we loved Him as He loves us. He
doesn't desire anything else than to have those to whom to give.
His riches do not lessen because He gives them away.
      1 3 . Well now, to get back to what I was saying, 14 the
Spouse commands that the doors of the dwelling places be
closed and even those of the castle and the outer wall. For in
desiring to carry off this soul, He takes away the breath so that,
even though the other senses sometimes last a little longer, a
person cannot speak at all; although at other times everything
is taken away at once, and the hands and the body grow cold so
that the person doesn't seem to have any life; nor sometimes is
it known whether he is breathing. This situation lasts but a
short while, I mean in its intensity; for when this extreme
suspension lets up a little, it seems that the body returns to
itself somewhat and is nourished so as to die again and give
more life to the soul. Nevertheless, so extreme an ecstasy
doesn't last long.
     14. But it will happen that even though the extreme ecsta­
sy ends, the will remains so absorbed and the intellect so
                                131
                     TERESA OF AVILA

withdrawn, for a day and even days, that the latter seems
incapable of understanding anything that doesn't lead to awak­
ening the will to love; and the will is wide awake to this love
and asleep to becoming attached to any creature.
      1 5. Oh, when the soul returns completely to itself, what
bewilderment and how intense its desires to be occupied in
God in every kind of way He might want! If the effects that
were mentioned were produced by the former kinds of prayer,
what will be the effects of a favor as sublime as this? The soul
would desire to have a thousand lives so as to employ them all
for God and that everything here on earth would be a tongue
to help it praise Him. The desires to do penance are most
strong, but not much help comes from performing it, because
the strength of love makes the soul feel that all that is done
amounts to little and see clearly that the martyrs did not
accomplish much in suffering the torments they did because
with this help from our Lord such suffering is easy. Hence
these souls complain to His Majesty when no opportunity for
suffering presents itself.
      1 6. When this favor is granted them in secret their esteem
for it is great; when it is given in the presence of other persons
their embarrassment and shame are so strong that the pain and
worry over what those who saw it will think somehow take the
soul away from what was being enjoyed. 15 For these persons
know the malice of the world, and they understand that the
world will not perhaps regard the experience for what it is, but
that what the Lord should be praised for will perhaps be the
occasion for rash judgments. In some ways it seems to me that
this pain and embarrassment amount to a lack of humility, for
if this person desires to be reviled, what difference does it make
what others think? But the soul cannot control such feelings.
One who was in this affliction heard from the Lord: "Don't be
afflicted, either they will praise Me or criticize you; and in
either case you gain."16 I learned afterward that this person
was very much consoled and encouraged by these words, and I
put them down here in case one of you might find herself in
this affliction. It seems that our Lord wishes all to understand
that that soul is now His, that no one should touch it. Well and
good if its body, or honor, or possessions are touched for this
soul draws honor for His Majesty out of everything. But that
                                132
                    THE INTERIOR CASTLE

one touch the soul-absolutely not; for if the soul does not
withdraw from its Spouse through a very culpable boldness,
He will protect it from the whole world and even from all hell.
     1 7. I don't know if anything has been explained about the
nature of rapture, for to explain it is completely impossible, as I
have said.17 But I don't believe anything has been lost by
trying. For there are effects that are very different in feigned
raptures. I do not say "feigned" because the one who has the
experience wants to deceive but because that person is de­
ceived. And since the signs and effects of the feigned raptures
are not in conformity with such a great blessing, the true
rapture is looked on unfavorably; and afterward the one to
whom the Lord grants it justifiably is not believed. May He be
blessed and praised forever, amen, amen.


                           CHAPTER FIVE
      Continues on the same subject and deals with a kind of rapture in
which God raises up the soul through a flight of the spirit, an experience
different from that just explained. Tells why courage is necessary.
Explains something about this delightful favor the Lord grants. The
chapter is a very beneficial one.
      1 . There is another kind of rapture-! call it flight of the
spirit-that, though substantially the same as other raptures, is
interiorly experienced very differently. 1 For sometimes sud­
denly a movement of the soul is felt that is so swift it seems the
spirit is carried off, and at a fearful speed especially in the
beginning. This is why I have told you2 that strong courage is
necessary for the one to whom God grants these favors, and
even faith and confidence and a full surrender to our Lord so
that He may do what He wants with the soul. Do you think it
is a small disturbance for a person to be very much in his senses
and see his soul carried off (and in the case of some, we have
read, even the body with the soul) without knowing where that
soul is going, what or who does this, or how? At the beginning
of this swift movement there is not so much certitude that the
rapture is from God.3
      2. Well, now, is there some means by which one can resist
it? None at all; rather, to resist makes matters worse, for I
know this was so with a certain person.4 It seems God wishes
                                   133
                      TERESA OF AVILA