with the Lord present in the very depths of the spirit.
      The first dwelling places. Setting aside those souls outside the
castle, paralyzed and crippled, in need of special healing from
the Lord Himself if they are to enter,68 Teresa turns her
attention to those who have entered the first area. Little of the
glowing light from the King's royal chamber filters into these
first dwelling places. Too many things entice and distract souls
here and thus prevent them from taking the time to search for
the true light. "So, I think, must be the condition of the soul.
Even though it may not be in a bad state, it is so involved in
worldly things and so absorbed with its possessions, honor, or
business affairs, as I have said, that even though as a matter of
fact it would want to see and enjoy its beauty these things do
not allow it to; nor does it seem that it can slip free from so
many impediments."69 Such people do have some good desires,
however; and they even pray on occasion. Their need, as is true
of everyone, is for self-knowledge and for knowledge of the
beauty of a soul in grace and of the ugliness of one in sin; in a
word, for some insight into the Christian mystery of sin and
grace. Self-knowledge and humility grow as the soul moves
onward through the castle toward the center.
      The second dwelling places. Here we have rooms set apart for
those who have taken some first steps in the practice of prayer,
who are more receptive to the promptings and invitations of
Christ's grace, which comes especially through external means
such as books, sermons, good friendships, and trials. The strug­
gle with the forces of evil is now more keenly felt, and the time
is ripe for the characteristically Teresian determination to
persevere convinced that the spiritual life cannot be grounded
on consolations. Conformity with God's will must be the goal
of one's strivings.
      The third dwelling places. To persevere in prayer and the
struggle involved is to go forward. 70 Those who have come to
this stage begin to long not to offend His Majesty; they guard
against venial sin, are fond of both ascetical practices and
periods of recollection, seek to use their time well, practice
charity toward their neighbor, and maintain balance in the use
of speech and dress and in the management of their household.
They are good Christians, and the Lord will not deny these
souls entrance into the final dwelling place if they so desire.71
                                  22
                       INTRODUCTION

Like the young man in the gospel, however, they could turn
away on hearing the requirements for becoming perfect. Any
threat to wealth or honor will quickly uncover their attach­
ments to these, and they are excessively discreet about their
health-to the point of fearing everything.72 In addition to
their reluctance to part with wealth and honor, they have a
tendency to be too easily shocked by the faults of others and
quickly distraught by a little dryness.73 Though these persons
find more consolation in the spiritual life than they do in
material comforts and distractions, they seldom receive the
deeper, more delectable peace and quiet of contemplation ex­
cept occasionally as an invitation to prepare better for what lies
ahead.74 They need someone who is free of the world's illu­
sions with whom they might speak.
      Dealing less extensively with these first three dwelling
places, Teresa says little about prayer; nor does she give advice
about methods. The impression left on her reader is that she is
anxious to advance quickly to the part that deals more immedi­
ately with what God does; and she complains that while we are
admonished to pray, only what we can do ourselves is ex­
plained and little is said of what the Lord does, "I mean about
the supernatural."75 It is in response to this need that Teresa
felt that she could contribute.
     The question might be raised here: Is it not useless for
people to read about mystical prayer and favors when they do
not themselves, for whatever reason, experience the same
things? In answer to this, Teresa replies that to learn about
God's work will lead a receptive person to the prayer of praise.
Characteristically she reasons that if she who was so wretched
was led to this praise when she read of such things, how much
more will good and humble souls praise Him upon learning of
them. Also, she thinks that these favors superabound with love
and fortitude, enabling a person to do more good and to jour­
ney with less toil; therefore there is the consequence of the
reader's learning how much he may lose through his own fault.
      Thefourth dwelling places. The beginning of the supernatural
or mystical marks off this section and presents Teresa with the
problem of how to explain infused prayer.76 She first seeks a
solution through an analysis of the difference between conso­
lations (contentos) and spiritual delight (gustos); she notes that the
                                  23
                       INTRODUCTION

former have their beginning in our human nature and end in
God while the latter has its beginning in God and overflows to
human nature. 77 The consolations, then, result from our own
efforts accompanied by God's grace; the spiritual delight is
received not through human efforts but passively. In this
dwelling place the first degrees of infused prayer are discussed.
Though there are no rules about the length of time required to
reach this point, "the important thing is not to think much but
to love much, and so do that which best stirs you to love."78 In
Teresa's thinking, love "doesn't consist in great delight but in
desiring with strong determination to please God in every­
thing, in striving, insofar as possible, not to offend Him, and in
asking Him for the advancement of the honor and glory of His
Son."79
     This contemplative prayer begins with a passive experi­
ence of recollection, a gentle drawing of the faculties inward; it
is different from the recollection achieved at the cost of human
effort. 80 This prayer of infused recollection is a less intense
form of initial contemplation or, as called by Teresa, the prayer
of quiet. While the will finds rest in the prayer of quiet, in the
peace of God's presence, the intellect (in Teresa's terminology)
continues to move about. One should let the intellect go and
surrender oneself into the arms of love,81 for distractions, the
wandering mind, are a part of the human condition and can no
more be avoided than can eating and sleeping.
     In a further effort to explain the difference between ac­
quired and infused prayer, she turns to another analogy: the
different ways in which two water troughs are filled. One
trough is filled with water channelled through aqueducts, by
the exercise of a great deal of ingenuity, while the other is filled
by a spring bubbling up from the very spot where the trough
is. However, the worth of one's prayer is not judged by its
passive character; rather "it is in the effects and deeds follow­
ing afterward that one discerns the true value of prayer."82
      Finally, in this dwelling place, since the passive prayer is
in its beginning stages, the natural (active) and the supernatu­
ral (passive) are joined. It is not unusual for souls to enter here.
      The fifth dwelling places. The prayer of union characterizes
these rooms, an experience in which the faculties become com­
pletely silent, or, in Teresa's words, are suspended, and which
                                 24
                      INTRODUCTION