person may be very absorbed in the prayer of quiet and spiritu­
al sleep. Some have such a weak constitution and imagination,
or I don't know the cause, that indeed in this deep recollection
they are so outside themselves (for they don't feel anything
exteriorly and all the senses are put to sleep) that they think as
when they are asleep and dreaming (and perhaps it is true that
they are asleep) that these locutions are spoken to them and
even that they see things. And they think these things are from
God, but in the end the effects are like those of sleep. It can also
happen that while with affection they are begging our Lord for
something, they think the locution is telling them what they
want to hear; this sometimes happens. But anyone who has had
much experience of God's locutions will not be deceived by
these that come, in my opinion, from the imagination.
      1 1 . With those locutions coming from the devil there is
more to fear. But if the signs mentioned8 are present, there can
be a great deal of certainty that the locutions are from God. But
the certainty shouldn't be so strong that if the locution con­
cerns something serious about oneself and has to be carried out
in deed, or business affairs involving third parties, anything
should ever be done or pass through one's mind without the
opinion of a learned and prudent confessor and servant of God.
This is so even if the soul increasingly understands and thinks
the locution is clearly from God. His Majesty wants the soul to
consult in this way; and that it does so does not mean it is
failing to carry out the Lord's commands, for He has told us,
where the words are undoubtedly His, to hold the confessor in
His place.9 And these words of His help to give courage if the
task is a difficult one, and our Lord when He so desires will
make the confessor believe that the locution comes from His
spirit. If He doesn't, the confessor and the soul are no longer
under obligation. To do otherwise and follow nothing but your
own opinion in this, I hold to be very dangerous. And so,
Sisters, I warn you, on the part of our Lord, that this never
happen to you.
      1 2 . There is another way in which the Lord speaks to the
soul-for I hold that it is very definitely from Him-with a
certain intellectual vision, the nature of which I will explain
further on. 10 The locution takes place in such intimate depths
and a person with the ears of the soul seems to hear those

                                123
                      TERESA OF AVILA

words from the Lord Himself so clearly and so in secret that
this very way in which they are heard, together with the acts
that the vision itself produces, assures that person and gives
him certitude that the devil can have no part to play in the
locution. Wonderful effects are left so that the soul may be­
lieve; at least there is assurance that the locution doesn't come
from the imagination. Furthermore, if the soul is attentive, it
can always have assurance for the following reasons: First,
there is a difference because of the clarity of the locution. It is
so clear that the soul remembers every syllable and whether it
is said in one style or another, even if it is a whole sentence.
But in a locution fancied by the imagination the words will not
be so clear or distinct but like something half-dreamed.
     1 3 . Second, in these locutions one often is not thinking
about what is heard (I mean that it comes unexpectedly and
even sometimes while one is in conversation), although many
times it is a response to what passes quickly through the mind
or to what did so previously. But it often refers to things about
the future that never entered the mind, and so the imagination
couldn't have fabricated it in such a way that the soul could be
deceived in fancying what was not desired or wanted or
thought of.
     14. Third, the one locution comes as in the case of a
person who hears, and that of imagination comes as in the case
of a person who gradually composes what he himself wants to
be told.
     1 5. Fourth, the words are very different, and with one of
them much is comprehended. Our intellect could not compose
them so quickly.
     16. Fifth, together with the words, in a way I wouldn't
know how to explain, there is often given much more to
understand than is ever dreamed of without words.
     I shall speak more about this mode of understanding else­
where, 1 1 for it is something very delicate and to the praise of
our Lord. For in regard to these different kinds of locutions,
there have been persons who were very doubtful and unable to
understand themselves. A certain person, especially, experi­
enced this doubt,12 and so there will be others. And thus I
know that she observed the differences with close attention
because the Lord has often granted her this favor, and the
                                1 24
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

greatest doubt she had in the beginning was whether she had
imagined the locution. That the words come from the devil can
be more quickly understood, even though his wiles are so
many, for he knows well how to counterfeit the Spirit of light.
In my opinion the devil will say the words very clearly so that
there will be certitude about their meaning, as is so with those
coming from the Spirit of truth. But he will not be able to
counterfeit the effects that were mentioned 13 or leave this
peace or light in the soul; on the contrary he leaves restlessness
and disturbance. But he can do little or no harm if the soul is
humble and does what I have mentioned, 14 that is, doesn't
make a move to do a thing of what it hears.
      1 7 . If the locutions contain words of favor and consolation
from the Lord, let the soul look attentively to see if it thinks
that because of them it is better than others. The more it hears
words of favor the more humble it should be left; if it isn't, let
it believe that the spirit is not from God. One thing very
certain is that when the spirit is from God the soul esteems
itself less, the greater the favor He granted, and it has more
awareness of its sins and is more forgetful of its own gain, and
its will and memory are employed more in seeking only the
honor of God, nor does it think about its own profit, and it
walks with greater fear lest its will deviate in anything, and
with greater certitude that it never deserved any of those favors
but deserved hell. Since all the favors and things it experienced
in prayer produce these effects, the soul does not walk fearfully
but with confidence in the mercy of the Lord, who is faithfuP5
and will not let the devil deceive it; although walking with fear
is always good.
      18. It could be that those whom the Lord does not lead
along this path think that such souls could refuse to listen to
these words spoken to them-and if the words are interior
distract themselves in such a way that they not be admitted­
and as a result go about free of these dangers.
     To this I reply that it is impossible. I'm not speaking of
imaginary locutions, for by not being so desirous of a thing or
wanting to pay attention to their imaginings souls have a
remedy. In locutions from the Lord, they have none. For the
very spirit that speaks puts a stop to all other thoughts and
makes the soul attend to what is said. It does this in such a way

                                125
                       TERESA OF AVILA