as its foundation. If humility is not genuinely present, for your
own sake the Lord will not construct a high building lest that
building fall to the ground. Thus, Sisters, that you might build
on good foundations, strive to be the least and the slaves of all,
looking at how or where you can please and serve them. What
you do in this matter you do more for yourself than for them
and lay stones so firmly that the castle will not fall.
      9. I repeat, it is necessary that your foundation consist of
more than prayer and contemplation. If you do not strive for
the virtues and practice them, you will always be dwarfs. And,
please God, it will be only a matter of not growing, for you
already know that whoever does not increase decreases. I hold
that love, where present, cannot possibly be content with re­
maining always the same.
      10. It will seem to you that I am speaking with those who
are beginning and that after this beginner's stage souls can rest.
I have already told you10 that the calm these souls have interi­
orly is for the sake of their having much less calm exteriorly
and much less desire to have exterior calm. What, do you think,
is the reason for those inspirations (or to put it better, aspira­
tions) I mentioned, and those messages the soul sends from the
interior center to the people at the top of the castle and to the
dwelling places outside the center where it is? Is it so that those
outside might fall asleep? No, absolutely not! That the facul­
ties, senses, and all that which is corporeal will not be idle, the
soul wages more war from the center than it did when it was
outside suffering with them, for then it didn't understand the
tremendous gain trials bring. Perhaps they were the means by
which God brought it to the center, and the company it has
gives it much greater strength than ever. For if here below, as
David says, in the company of the saints we will become
saints, 1 1 there is no reason to doubt that, being united with the
Strong One through so sovereign a union of spirit with spirit,
fortitude will cling to such a soul; and so we shall understand
what fortitude the saints had for suffering and dying.
      1 1 . It is very certain that from that fortitude which clings
to it there the soul assists all those who are in the castle, and
even the body itself, which often, seemingly, does not feel the
strength. But the soul is fortified by the strength it has from
drinking wine in this wine cellar, where its Spouse has brought
                                191
                      TERESA OF AVILA

it12 and from where He doesn't allow it to leave; and strength
flows back to the weak body, just as food placed in the stomach
strengthens the head and the whole body. Thus the soul has its
share of misfortune while it lives. However much it does, the
interior strength increases and thus, too, the war that is waged;
for everything seems like a trifle to it. The great penances that
many saints-especially the glorious Magdalene, who had al­
ways been surrounded by so much luxury-performed must
have come from this center; also that hunger which our Father
Elijah had for the honor of his God 13 and which Saint Dominic
and Saint Francis had so as to draw souls to praise God. I tell
you, though they were forgetful of themselves, their suffering
must have been great.
      1 2. This is what I want us to strive for, my Sisters; and let
us desire and be occupied in prayer not for the sake of our
enjoyment but so as to have this strength to serve. Let's refuse
to take an unfamiliar path, for we shall get lost at the most
opportune time. It would indeed be novel to think of having
these favors from God through a path other than the one He
took and the one followed by all His saints. May the thought
never enter our minds. Believe me, Martha and Mary must join
together in order to show hospitality to the Lord and have Him
always present and not host Him badly by failing to give Him
something to eat. How would Mary, always seated at His feet,
provide Him with food if her sister did not help her? His food
is that in every way possible we draw souls that they may be
saved and praise Him always.14
      1 3. You will make two objections: one, that He said that
Mary had chosen the better part. The answer is that she had
already performed the task of Martha, pleasing the Lord by
washing His feet and drying them with her hair. 1 s Do you
think it would be a small mortification for a woman of nobility
like her to wander through these streets (and perhaps alone
because her fervent love made her unaware of what she was
doing) and enter a house she had never entered before and
afterward suffer the criticism of the Pharisee and the very
many other things she must have suffered? The people saw a
woman like her change so much-and, as we know, she was
among such malicious people-and they saw her friendship
with the Lord whom they vehemently abhorred, and that she
                                 192
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

wanted to become a saint since obviously she would have
changed her manner of dress and everything else. All of that
was enough to cause them to comment on the life she had
formerly lived. If nowadays there is so much gossip against
persons who are not so notorious, what would have been said
then? I tell you, Sisters, the better part came after many trials
and much mortification, for even if there were no other trial
than to see His Majesty abhorred, that would be an intolerable
one. Moreover, the many trials that afterward she suffered at
the death of the Lord and in the years that she subsequently
lived in His absence must have been a terrible torment. You see
she wasn't always in the delight of contemplation at the feet of
the Lord.
     14. The other objection you will make is that you are
unable to bring souls to God, that you do not have the means;
that you would do it willingly but that not being teachers or
preachers, as were the apostles, you do not know how. This
objection I have answered at times in writing, 16 but I don't
know if I did so in this Castle. Yet since the matter is something
I believe is passing through your mind on account of the
desires God gives you, I will not fail to respond here. I already
told you elsewhere17 that sometimes the devil gives us great
desires so that we will avoid setting ourselves to the task at
hand, serving our Lord in possible things, and instead be
content with having desired the impossible. Apart from the
fact that by prayer you will be helping greatly, you need not be
desiring to benefit the whole world but must concentrate on
those who are in your company, and thus your deed will be
greater since you are more obliged toward them. Do you think
such deep humility, your mortification, service of all and great
charity toward them, and love of the Lord are of little benefit?
This fire of love in you enkindles their souls, and with every
other virtue you will be always awakening them. Such service
will not be small but very great and very pleasing to the Lord.
By what you do in deed-that which you can-His Majesty
will understand that you would do much more. Thus He will
give you the reward He would if you had gained many souls
for Him.
      1 5. You will say that such service does not convert souls
because all the Sisters you deal with are already good. Who has
                               193
                     TERESA OF AVILA