that in order to dwell more perfectly in God the soul is so
separated from the body that I don't even know if it has life
enough to breathe. (I was just now thinking about this, and it
seems to me that it doesn't-at least if it does breathe, it is
unaware that it is doing so.) Nonetheless, its whole intellect
would want to be occupied in understanding something of
what is felt. And since the soul does not have the energy to
attain to this, it is so stunned that, even if it is not completely
lost, neither a hand nor a foot stirs, as we say here below when
a person is in such a swoon that we think he is dead.
      0 secrets of God! I would never tire of trying to explain
them if I thought I could in some way manage to do so; thus I
will say a thousand foolish things in order that I might at times
succeed and that we might give great praise to the Lord.
     4. I said that this union was not some kind of dreamy
state,5 because even if the experience in the dwelling place that
was mentioned is abundant the soul remains doubtful that it
was union. It doubts whether it imagined the experience;
whether it was asleep; whether the experience was given by
God; or whether the devil transformed himself into an angel of
light.6 It is left with a thousand suspicions. That it has them is
good, for, as I have said,? even our own nature can sometimes
deceive us in that dwelling place. Though there is not so much
room for poisonous things to enter, some tiny lizards do enter;
since these lizards have slender heads, they can poke their
heads in anywhere. And even though they do no harm, espe­
cially if one pays no attention to them, as I said, 8 they are often
a bother since they are little thoughts proceeding from the
imagination and from what I mentioned. But however slender
they may be, these little lizards cannot enter this fifth dwelling
place; for there is neither imagination, nor memory, nor intel­
lect that can impede this good. And I would dare say that if the
prayer is truly union with God the devil cannot even enter or
do any damage. His Majesty is so joined and united with the
essence of the soul that the devil will not dare approach, nor
will he even know about this secret. And this is obvious. Since,
as they say, he doesn't know our mind, he will have less
knowledge of something so secret; for God doesn't even entrust
this to our own mind. Oh, what a great good, a state in which
this accursed one does us no harm! Thus the soul is left with
                                 87
                     TERESA OF AVILA

such wonderful blessings because God works within it without
anyone's disturbing Him, not even ourselves. What will He not
give, who is so fond of giving and who can give all that He
wants?
     5. It seems that I have left you confused by saying "if it is
union" and that there are other unions. And indeed how true it
is that there are! Even though these unions regard vain things,
the devil will use such things to transport us when they are
greatly loved. But he doesn't do so in the way God does, or
with the delight and satisfaction of soul, or with the peace and
joy. This union is above all earthly joys, above all delights,
above all consolations, and still more than that. It doesn't
matter where those spiritual or earthly joys come from, for the
feeling is very different, as you will have experienced. I once
said9 that the difference is like that between feeling something
on the rough outer covering of the body or in the marrow of
the bones. And that was right on the mark, for I don't know
how to say it better.
     6. It seems to me that you're still not satisfied, for you will
think you can be mistaken and that these interior things are
something difficult to examine. What was said will be suffi­
cient for anyone who has experienced union. Yet, because the
difference between union and the previous experience is great,
I want to mention a clear sign by which you will be sure
against error or doubts about whether the union is from God.
His Majesty has brought it to my memory today, and in my
opinion it is the sure sign. In difficult matters, even though it
seems to me that I understand and that I speak the truth, I
always use this expression "it seems to me." For if I am
mistaken, I'm very much prepared to believe what those who
have a great deal of learning say. Even though they have not
experienced these things, very learned men have a certain I
don't know what; for since God destines them to give light to
His Church, He enlightens them that they might acknowledge
a truth when presented with it. And if they do not live a
dissipated life but are God's servants, they are never surprised
by His grandeurs; they have come to understand well that He
can do ever more and more. And, finally, even though some
things are not so well explained, these learned men will find


                                88
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

others in their books through which they will see that these
things could take place.
      7. I have had a great deal of experience with learned men,
and have also had experience with half-learned, fearful ones;
these latter cost me dearly. 10 At least I think that anyone who
refuses to believe that God can do much more or that He has
considered and continues to consider it good sometimes to
communicate favors to His creatures has indeed closed the
door to receiving them. Therefore, Sisters, let this never hap­
pen to you, but believe that God can do far more and don't turn
your attention to whether the ones to whom He grants His
favors are good or bad; for His Majesty knows this, as I have
told you. 1 1 There is no reason for us to meddle in the matter,
but with humility and simplicity of heart we should serve and
praise Him for His works and marvels.
     8. Now then, to return to the sign that I say is the true
one: 1 2 you now see that God has made this soul a fool with
regard to all so as better to impress upon it true wisdom. For
during the time of this union it neither sees, nor hears, nor
understands, because the union is always short and seems to
the soul even much shorter than it probably is. God so places
Himself in the interior of that soul that when it returns to itself
it can in no way doubt that it was in God and God was in it.
This truth remains with it so firmly that even though years go
by without God's granting that favor again, the soul can nei­
ther forget nor doubt that it was in God and God was in it.
This is what matters now, for I shall speak of the effects of this
prayer afterward. I 3
     9 . Now, you will ask me, how did the soul see this truth or
understand if it didn't see or understand anything? I don't say
that it then saw the truth but that afterward it sees the truth
clearly, not because of a vision but because of a certitude
remaining in the soul that only God can place there. I know a
person who hadn't learned that God was in all things by
presence, power, and essence, and through a favor of this kind
that God granted her she came to believe it. After asking a half­
learned man of the kind I mentioned 14-he knew as little as she
had known before God enlightened her-she was told that God
was present only by grace. Such was her own conviction that


                                89
                     TERESA OF AVILA