But His Majesty wants us to consider ourselves undeserving of
them because of our wretchedness, and desires that we help
ourselves in every way possible. I hold for myself that until we
die such an attitude is necessary however sublime the prayer
may be.
     9. It is true that anyone whom the Lord places in the
seventh dwelling place rarely, or hardly ever, needs to make
this effort. (I will give the reason for this fact when speaking of
that dwelling place, if I remember.)8 But such a person walks
continually in an admirable way with Christ, our Lord, in
whom the divine and the human are joined and who is always
that person's companion. As for the above, when the fire in the
will that was mentioned9 is not enkindled and God's presence
is not felt, it is necessary that we seek this presence. This is
what His Majesty wants us to do, as the bride did in the Song of
Songs, 10 and He wants us to ask creatures who it is who made
them-as Saint Augustine says, I believe, in his Meditations or
Confessions1 1-and not be like dunces wasting time waiting for
what was given us once before. At the beginning of the life of
prayer it may be that the Lord will not give this fire in a year,
or even in many years. His Majesty knows why; we must not
desire to know nor is there any reason why we should. Since
we know the path by which we must please God, which is that
of the commandments and counsels, we should follow it very
diligently, and think of His life and death and of the many
things we owe Him; let the rest come when the Lord desires.
     10. At this point, someone may respond that he cannot
dwell on these things, and, because of what was said, 1 2 perhaps
he will in a certain way be right. You already know that
discursive thinking with the intellect is one thing and repre足
senting truths to the intellect by means of the memory is
another. You may say, perhaps, that you do not understand me,
and indeed it could be that I don't know how to explain the
matter; but I shall do the best I can. By meditation I mean
much discursive reflection with the intellect in the following
way: We begin to think about the favor God granted us in
giving us His only Son, and we do not stop there, but go on to
the mysteries of His whole glorious life; or we begin to think
about the prayer in the garden, but the intellect doesn't stop
until He is on the cross; or we take a phase of the Passion like,
                                147
                      TERESA OF AVILA

let us say, the arrest, and we proceed with this mystery consid足
ering in detail the things there are to think of and feel about the
betrayal of Judas, the flight of the apostles, and all the rest; this
kind of reflection is an admirable and very meritorious prayer.
     1 1 . This prayer is the kind that those whom God has
brought to supernatural things and to perfect contemplation
are right in saying they cannot practice. As I have said, 13 I
don't know the reason, but usually they cannot practice discur足
sive reflection. But I say that a person will not be right if he
says he does not dwell on these mysteries or often have them in
mind, especially when the Catholic Church celebrates them.
Nor is it possible for the soul to forget that it has received so
much from God, so many precious signs of love, for these are
living sparks that will enkindle it more in its love for our Lord.
But I say this person doesn't understand himself, because the
soul understands these mysteries in a more perfect manner.
The intellect represents them in such a way, and they are so
stamped on the memory, that the mere sight of the Lord fallen
to the ground in the garden with that frightful sweat is enough
to last the intellect not only an hour but many days, while it
looks with a simple gaze at who He is and how ungrateful we
have been for so much suffering. Soon the will responds, even
though it may not do so with tender feelings, with the desire to
serve somehow for such a great favor and to suffer something
for One who suffered so much, and with other similar desires
relating to what the memory and intellect are dwelling on. I
believe that for this reason a person cannot go on to further
discursive reflection on the Passion, and this inability makes
him think that he cannot think about it.
      1 2 . If he doesn't dwell on these mysteries in the way that
was mentioned, it is good that he strive to do so, for I know
that doing so will not impede the most sublime prayer. I don't
think it's good to fail to dwell often on these mysteries. If as a
 result the Lord suspends the intellect, well and good; for even
though the soul may not so desire He will make it abandon
what it was dwelling on. And I am very certain that this
procedure is not a hindrance but a very great help toward
every good; the hindrance would come from a great deal of
work with the discursive reflection I mentioned in the begin足
 ning. I hold that one who has advanced further along cannot
                                 148
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE