about the relation of Men to God and with the Universe, the
relation of Christianity and the Christian culture with other re­
ligions and cultures, not simply under a theological, but under
a vital, existential point of view. Everything was in ferment
and Spain was the battleground of such a historical moment,
though, of course, not all the factors and ideas were Spanish.
      During that time, Teresa de Cepeda y Ahumada ( 1 5 1 5-
1 582) was born in Castilia, Central Spain.
      Teresa was twenty-one when she entered religious life and
became a Carmelite nun in Avila, her native town. The aim of
the Carmelite Order is to enable its members to lead a life of
contemplation through a long practice of prayer (in its highest
sense), preceded by detachment and penance. And, of course,
this centered on a loving and not merely speculative contem­
plation. Two years after she entered the Convent of the Incar­
nation ( 1 5 3 8), she writes: "The Lord began to be so gracious to
me on this way of prayer of Q!!iet, and occasionally even to the
Union". Aware, as she was, of her interior life we may rely on
her own terminology and affirm that she began a life of habit­
ual and steady contemplation only 1 2 years afterwards. She fol­
lowed this highest life of the spirit for 3 3 years. She was of an
extreme sensitiveness and also of intense awareness in things
spiritual; thus, this her second period may be divided into two
different stages: cne of simple prayer of quiet, transcending all
conceptual understanding and with partial consciousness of
her union with God ( 1 2 years), and the other of habitual union
with God in a life of identification of will ( 1 1 years) and of
spiritual marriage ( 1 0 years).
      It was in her fortieth year, having attained habitual union
with God, that she realised her apostolic mission of raising the
spiritual climate and observance of her Order, and instead of
enjoying, relishing her own spiritual perfection she started the
colossal adventure of reforming the Carmel with no other
means than her great love and confidence in God. She had to
overcome all sorts of difficulties and misunderstandings from
all sides. In spite of her continuous ill health, and without los­
ing the intensity of her contemplative life and habitual union
with God, she undertook the most astonishing active life of
founding convents of "discalced" Carmelites all over Spain.


                                XIV
                              PREFACE


      Perhaps one of the most striking features was her thor­
oughness, her wholeness. Her holiness brought her to such
close union with God as a person can have in this world and
such union really divinised per being. All the same she re­
mained a full human personality with a sense for all little hu­
man business on earth, even with a very exquisite sense of
humour. Her union with God did not separate her from her
fellowmen and she remained throughout a woman with all the
complexity of a feminine soul. The secret of her positive atti­
tude towards life and nature was her christocentric spirituality.
Her awareness of God and her God-like life was due of her dis­
covery and experience of God in and through Christ, not exclud­
ing His Humanity. It is an essential feature of the Carmelite
spirituality to consider Christ as the bridegroom of the soul
and to find in that living union (spiritual marriage) the most
perfect transformation into God, for we should bear in mind
that Christ realises in Himself the highest unity of God and
creature.
     St. John of the Cross ( 1 542- 1 59 1 ), like St. Teresa, also born
in Castilia, Central Spain, entered the Order of the "calced"
Carmelites friars at 2 1 , and when 26 he met Teresa, who was al­
ready 5 3 . Instead of passing over to the Carthusian Order to
live a more austere life of penance and contemplation as he first
intended to do, he joined St. Teresa in the noble work of re­
forming the Carmel among men, as Teresa had already begun
among the women. For the realisation of that project he had to
endure calumnies and persecution of the most cruel sort. Un­
like Teresa he never became the juridical Founder, but he was
the inspiring soul of Carmel. He was a well trained theologian
(student of Alcala and Salamanca) and became one of the great­
est mystics of all times. He wrote several books, all published
after his death. He is also one of the best poets in the whole of
Spanish literature.

2.   The Mystical Doctrine
     Only a mystic can teach a mystic doctrine, and this teach­
ing is a vital communication. If they, by chance, should write
something, that is only a substitute and a reminder. If we try to
summarise again what they have written at length, and yet as


                                  XV
                            PREFACE

shortly as possible, for they do not use superfluous words, we
surely misrepresent their doctrine and only give a shadow of it.
How can we dare suggest an outline of their message and point
out aspects under which they tried to express the ineffable? We
may however make an attempt to investigate the philosophical
implications of their doctrine by pointing out their metaphysi­
cal structure.
     The aim and end of human life is Union with God, it is the
transformation of our being and its divinisation. But the crea­
ture of itself is no-thing, or, as our saint repeats constantly, a
nonada, a not-nothingness, i.e. the creature is a pure negation of
its "not-yet-being". It exists, because somehow it subsists out­
side nothingness-"extra nihilum" being suspended over the
abyss of pure nothingness by the creative power of God. Thus,
the creature, in order to reach God and be united with Him,
must abandon and forsake its own way of being, i.e., its "not­
yet-being", its negativity and negate its own no-thingness. Be­
ing cannot be destroyed. All that we annihilate is the inherent
negative element of our temporal existence. In other words,
this union with God is not simply one of mere knowledge, but
an ontological incorporation, though our intellect is also a part
of our being. It is not simply by "knowing" God that we shall
be transformed into Him, but by being fully united with Him
(and our being is something more than intellect.) It is by being
one with Him, that we reach our ultimate destiny.
     Now, strictly speaking, between the "creature" as such,
and God as such, there is nothing in common. If the former has
to be united with God, i.e., it has to be divinised, its character
has to be stripped off. Not only can I not reach God, but my
being cannot be united with Him as long as it remains "crea­
ture". Not because "nature" is bad, but because it is not of the
order of the Divinity. But I have, of myself, nothing of this or­
der; my nature does not possess anything homogeneous with
God so that it could be utilised in my union with Him.
     That leads us to the famous way of absolute nothingness of
our mystic. I cannot trust my senses, nor my feelings, nor my
intellect with its intuitions, nor my will, nor even my very be­
ing. I cannot rely upon any created thing. If I see God, if I feel
Him, even if I love Him, so far as it is my love, that which I see,


                                XVI
                           PREFACE