Passion it remembers His most meek and beautiful counte足
nance. This remembrance is the greatest consolation, just as
here below it would be far more consoling to see a person who
has done a great deal of good for us than someone we had never
met. I tell you that so delightful a remembrance brings much
consolation and benefit.
     Many are the other blessings these visions bring, but since
so much has been said about such effects, and more will be said,
I don't want to tire myself, or tire you, but advise you strongly
that when you learn or hear that God grants these favors to
souls you never beseech Him or desire Him to lead you by this
path.
     1 5. Although this path may seem to you very good, one to
be highly esteemed and reverenced, desiring it is inappropriate
for certain reasons: First, the desire to be given what you have
never deserved shows a lack of humility, and so I believe that
whoever desires this path will not have much humility. Just as
the thoughts of a lowly workman are far from any desire to be
king since such a thing seems impossible to him, and he thinks
he doesn't deserve it, so too with the humble person in similar
matters. I believe that these favors will never be given to those
who desire them, because before granting them God gives a
deep self-knowledge. For how will he who has such desires
understand in truth that he is being granted a very great favor
at not being in hell? Second, such a person will very certainly
be deceived or in great danger because the devil needs nothing
more than to see a little door open before playing a thousand
tricks on us. Third, the imagination itself, when there is a great
desire, makes a person think that he sees what he desires and
hears it, as with those who desiring something during the day
and thinking a great deal about it happen to dream of it at
night. Fourth, it would be extremely bold to want to choose a
path while not knowing what suits me more. Such a matter
should be left to the Lord who knows me-for He leads me
along the path that is fitting-so that in all things I might do
His will. Fifth, do you think the trials suffered by those to
whom the Lord grants these favors are few? No, they are
extraordinary and of many kinds. How do you know you
would be able to bear them? Sixth, by the very way you think


                               161
                     TERESA OF AVILA

you will gain, you will lose, as Saul did by being king. 13
     1 6. In sum, Sisters, besides these reasons there are others;
believe me, the safest way is to want only what God wants. He
knows more than we ourselves do, and He loves us. Let us
place ourselves in His hands so that His will may be done in us,
and we cannot err if with a determined will we always main足
tain this attitude. And you must note that greater glory is not
merited by receiving a large number of these favors; rather, on
the contrary the recipients of these favors are obliged to serve
more since they have received more. The Lord doesn't take
away from us that which, because it lies within our power, is
more meritorious. So there are many holy persons who have
never received one of these favors; and others who receive
them but are not holy. And do not think the favors are given
continually; rather, for each time the Lord grants them there
are many trials. Thus, the soul doesn't think about receiving
more but about how to serve for what it has received.
     1 7. It is true that this vision must be a powerful help
toward possessing the virtues with higher perfection, but the
person who has gained them at the cost of his own labors will
merit much more. I know a person or two persons-one was a
man-to whom the Lord had granted some of these favors, who
were so desirous of serving His Majesty at their own cost,
without these great delights, and so anxious to suffer that they
complained to our Lord because He bestowed the favors on
them, and if they could decline receiving these gifts they would
do so. 14 I am speaking not of the delights coming from these
visions-for in the end these persons see that the visions are
very beneficial and to be highly esteemed-but of those the
Lord gives in contemplation.
     18. It is true that these desires also, in my opinion, are
supernatural and characteristic of souls very much inflamed in
love. Such souls would want the Lord to see that they do not
serve Him for pay. Thus, as I have said, 15 they never, as a
motive for making the effort to serve more, think about receiv足
ing glory for anything they do. But their desire is to satisfy
love, and it is love's nature to serve with deeds in a thousand
ways. If it could, love would want to discover ways of consum足
ing the soul within itself. And if it were necessary to be always


                                162
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

annihilated for the greater honor of God, love would do so very
eagerly. May He be praised forever, amen. For in lowering
Himself to commune with such miserable creatures, He wants
to show His greatness.

                          CHAPTER TEN
      Tells about other favors God grants the soul, in a way different
from those just mentioned, and of the great profit that comes from
them.
       1 . In many ways does the Lord communicate Himself to
the soul with these apparitions. He grants some of them when
it is afflicted; others, when a great trial is about to come; others,
so that His Majesty might take His delight in the soul and give
delight to it. There's no reason to go into further detail about
each, since my intention is only to explain the different favors
there are on this road, insofar as I understand them. Thus you
will know, Sisters, their nature and their effects, lest we fancy
that everything imagined is a vision. When what you see is an
authentic vision, you won't go about disturbed or afflicted if
you understand that such a thing is possible. The devil gains
much and is extremely pleased to see a soul afflicted and
disquieted, for he knows that disturbance impedes it from
being totally occupied in loving and praising God.
      His Majesty communicates Himself in other ways that are
more sublime and less dangerous because the devil, I believe,
will be unable to counterfeit them. Thus, since these latter are
something very secret, it is difficult to explain them, whereas
the imaginative visions are easier to explain.
      2. It will happen, when the Lord is pleased, that while the
soul is in prayer and very much in its senses a suspension will
suddenly be experienced in which the Lord will reveal deep
secrets. It seems the soul sees these secrets in God Himself, for
they are not visions of the most sacred humanity. Although I
say the soul sees, it doesn't see anything, for the favor is not an
imaginative vision but very much an intellectual one. In this
vision it is revealed how all things are seen in God and how He
has them all in Himself. 1 This favor is most beneficial. Even
though it passes in a moment, it remains deeply engraved in


                                  163
                      TERESA OF AVILA