9. And that you realize, in case you might sometime have
this experience, what is due to our weakness, it happens at
times that while in that state, as you have seen, the soul dies
with the desire to die. For the fire afflicts so much that seem­
ingly hardly anything keeps the soul from leaving the body.
The soul truly fears and lest it end up dying would want the
pain to abate. The soul indeed understands that this fear is
from natural weakness, because on the other hand its desire to
die is not taken away. Nor can a remedy be found to remove
this pain until the Lord Himself takes it away, usually by
means of a great rapture, or with some vision, where the true
Comforter consoles and strengthens the soul that it might
desire to live as long as God wills.
     10. This experience is a painful one, but the soul is left
with the most beneficial effects, and fear of the trials that can
come its way is lost. When compared to the painful feeling
experienced in the soul, the trials don't seem to amount to
anything. The benefits are such that one would be pleased to
suffer the pain often. But one can in no way do this, nor is
there any means for suffering the experience again. The soul
must wait until the Lord desires to give this favor, just as there
is no way to resist it or remove it when it comes. The soul is
left with greater contempt for the world than before because it
sees that nothing in the world was any help to it in that
torment, and it is much more detached from creatures because
it now sees that only the Creator can console and satisfy it. And
it has greater fear of offending Him, taking more care not to do
so, because it sees that He can also torment as well as console.
     1 1 . Two experiences, it seems to me, that lie on this spiri­
tual path put a person in danger of death: The one is this pain,
for it truly is a danger, and no small one; the other is over­
whelming joy and delight, which reaches so extraordinary a
peak that indeed the soul, I think, swoons to the point that it is
hardly kept from leaving the body-indeed, its happiness could
not be considered small.
     Here you will see, Sisters, whether I was right in saying
that courage is necessary, 8 and whether when you ask the Lord
for these favors He is right in answering as He did the sons of
Zebedee, are you able to drink the chalice?9


                                1 70
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

      1 2 . I believe all of us, Sisters, will answer yes; and very
rightly so, for His Majesty gives strength to the one He sees has
need of it. He defends these souls in all things; when they are
persecuted and criticized He answers for them as He did for
the Magdalene10-if not through words, through deeds. And in
the very end, before they die, He will pay for everything at
once, as you will now see. May He be blessed forever, and may
all creatures praise Him, amen.




                                171
  THE SEVENTH DWELLING PLACES


                  CONTAINS FOUR CHAPTERS




                           CHAPTER ONE
      Treats of the great favors God grants souls that have entered the
seventh dwelling places. Tells how in her opinion there is a certain
difference between the soul and the spirit, although the soul is all one.
The chapter contains noteworthy doctrine.
      1 . You will think, Sisters, that since so much has been said
about this spiritual path it will be impossible for anything
more to be said. Such a thought would be very foolish. Since
the greatness of God is without limits, His works are too. Who
will finish telling of His mercies and grandeurs? To do so is
impossible, and thus do not be surprised at what was said, and
will be said, because it is but a naught in comparison to what
there is to tell of God. He grants us a great favor in having
communicated these things to a person through whom we can
know about them. Thus the more we know about His commu­
nication to creatures the more we will praise His grandeur and
make the effort to have esteem for souls in which the Lord
delights so much. Each one of us has a soul, but since we do not
 prize souls as is deserved by creatures made in the image of
God we do not understand the deep secrets that lie in them.
      May it please His Majesty, if He may thereby be served, to
move my pen and give me understanding of how I might say
something about the many things to be said that God reveals to
the one whom He places in this dwelling place. I have earnest­
 ly begged this of His Majesty since He knows that my inten-


                                   1 72
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

tion is to make known His mercies that His name may be more
praised and glorified.
      2. I hope, not for myself but for you, Sisters, that He may
grant me this favor. Thus you will understand how important
it is for you not to impede your Spouse's celebration of this
spiritual marriage with your souls, since this marriage brings
so many blessings, as you will see. 0 great God! It seems that a
creature as miserable as I should tremble to deal with a thing so
foreign to what I deserve to understand. And, indeed, I have
been covered with confusion wondering if it might not be
better to conclude my discussion of this dwelling place with
just a few words. For it seems to me that others will think I
know about it through experience. This makes me extremely
ashamed; for, knowing what I am, such a thought is a terrible
thing. On the other hand, the thought of neglecting to explain
this dwelling place seemed to me to be a temptation and
weakness on my part, no matter how many of the above judg­
ments you make about me. May God be praised and under­
stood a little more, and let all the world cry out against me;
how much more so in that I will perhaps be dead when what I
write is seen. May He be blessed who lives, and will live,
forever, amen.
      3. When our Lord is pleased to have pity on this soul that
He has already taken spiritually as His Spouse because of what
it suffers and has suffered through its desires, He brings it,
before the spiritual marriage is consummated, into His dwell­
ing place, which is this seventh. For just as in heaven so in the
soul His Majesty must have a room where He dwells alone. Let
us call it another heaven. It's very important for us, Sisters, not
to think the soul is something dark. Since we do not see the
soul, it usually seems that there is no such thing as interior
light but only the exterior light that we all see, and that a
certain darkness is in our soul. As for the soul that is not in
grace, I confess this is so, but not through any fault of the Sun
of Justice who dwells within it giving it being but because such
a soul is incapable of receiving the light, as I believe I have said
in the first dwelling place, according to what a certain person
understood. 1 For these unfortunate souls are as though in a
dark prison, bound hands and feet, in regard to doing anything


                                 173
                      TERESA OF AVILA