2. They say that the soul enters within itself and, at other
times, that it rises above itself.2 With such terminology I
wouldn't know how to clarify anything. This is what's wrong
with me: that I think you will understand by my way of
explaining, while perhaps I'm the only one who will under­
stand myself. Let us suppose that these senses and faculties (for
I have already mentioned that these powers are the people of
this castle,3 which is the image I have taken for my explana­
tion) have gone outsic;le and have walked for days and years
with strangers-enemies of the well-being of the castle. Having
seen their perdition they've already begun to approach the
castle even though they may not manage to remain inside
because the habit of doing so is difficult to acquire. But still
they are not traitors, and they walk in the environs of the
castle. Once the great King, who is in the center dwelling place
of this castle, sees their good will, He desires in His wonderful
mercy to bring them back to Him. Like a good shepherd, with
a whistle so gentle that even they themselves almost fail to hear
it, He makes them recognize His voice and stops them from
going so far astray and brings them back to their dwelling
place. And this shepherd's whistle has such power that they
abandon the exterior things in which they were estranged from
Him and enter the castle.
      3 . I don't think I've ever explained it as clearly as I have
now. When God grants the favor it is a great help to seek Him
within where He is found more easily and in a way more
beneficial to us than when sought in creatures, as Saint Augus­
tine says after having looked for Him in many places.4 Don't
think this recollection is acquired by the intellect striving to
 think about God within itself, or by the imagination imagining
 Him within itself. Such efforts are good and an excellent kind
of meditation because they are founded on a truth, which is
that God is within us. But this isn't the prayer of recollection
because it is something each one can do-with the help of God,
 as should be understood of everything. But what I'm speaking
of comes in a different way. Sometimes before one begins to
 think of God, these people are already inside the castle. I don't
 know in what way or how they heard their shepherd's whistle.
It wasn't through the ears, because nothing is heard. But one
noticeably senses a gentle drawing inward, as anyone who goes
                                78
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

through this will observe, for I don't know how to make it
clearer. It seems to me that I have read where it was compared
to a hedgehog curling up or a turtle drawing into its sheli. S
(The one who wrote this example must have understood the
experience well.) But these creatures draw inward whenever
they want. In the case of this recollection, it doesn't come when
we want it but when God wants to grant us the favor. I for
myself hold that when His Majesty grants it, He does so to
persons who are already beginning to despise the things of the
world. I don't say that those in the married state do so in deed,
for they cannot, but in desire; for He calls such persons espe­
cially so that they might be attentive to interior matters. So I
believe that if we desire to make room for His Majesty, He will
give not only this but more, and give it to those whom He
begins to call to advance further.
     4. May whoever experiences this within himself praise
God greatly because it is indeed right to recognize the favor
and give thanks, for doing so will dispose one for other greater
favors. And this recollection is a preparation for being able to
listen, as is counseled in some books,6 so that the soul instead of
striving to engage in discourse strives to remain attentive and
aware of what the Lord is working in it. If His Majesty has not
begun to absorb us, I cannot understand how the mind can be
stopped. There's no way of doing so without bringing about
more harm than good, although there has been a lengthy con­
troversy on this matter among some spiritual persons. For my
part I must confess my lack of humility, but those in favor of
stopping the mind have never given me a reason for submitting
to what they say. One of them tried to convince me with a
certain book by the saintly Friar Peter of Alcantara7-for I
believe he is a saint-to whom I would submit because I know
that he knew. And we read it together, and he says the same
thing I do, although not in my words. But it is clear in what he
says that love must be already awakened. It could be that I'm
mistaken, but I have the following reasons.
      5. First, in this work of the spirit the one who thinks less
and has less desire to act does more. What we must do is to beg
like the needy poor before a rich and great emperor, and then
lower our eyes and wait with humility. When through His
secret paths it seems we understand that He hears us, then it is
                                 79
                      TERESA OF AVILA

good to be silent, since He has allowed us to remain near Him;
and it will not be wrong to avoid working with the intellect-if
we can work with it, I mean. But if we don't yet know whether
this King has heard or seen us, we mustn't become fools. The
soul does become quite a fool when it tries to induce this
prayer, and it is left much drier; and the imagination perhaps
becomes more restless through the effort made not to think of
anything. But the Lord desires that we beseech Him and call to
mind that we are in His presence; He knows what is suitable
for us. I cannot persuade myself to use human diligence in a
matter in which it seems that His Majesty has placed a limit,
and I want to leave the diligence to Him. What He did not
reserve to Himself are many other efforts we can make with
His help, such as: penance, good deeds, and prayer-insofar as
our wretchedness can do these things.
      6. The second reason is that these interior works are all
gentle and peaceful; doing something arduous would cause
more harm than good. I call any force that we might want to
use "something arduous"; for example, it would be arduous to
hold one's breath. Leave the soul in God's hands, let Him do
whatever He wants with it, with the greatest disinterest about
your own benefit as is possible and the greatest resignation to
the will of God.
      The third reason is that the very care used not to think of
anything will perhaps rouse the mind to think very much.
      The fourth is that what is most essential and pleasing to
God is that we be mindful of His honor and glory and forget
ourselves and our own profit and comfort and delight. How is
a person forgetful of self if he is so careful not to stir or even to
allow his intellect or desires to be stirred to a longing for the
greater glory of God, or if he rests in what he already has?
When His Majesty desires the intellect to stop, He occupies it
in another way and gives it a light so far above what we can
attain that it remains absorbed. Then, without knowing how,
 the intellect is much better instructed than it was through all
 the soul's efforts not to make use of it. Since God gave us our
 faculties that we might work with them and in this work they
 find their reward, there is no reason to charm them; we should
 let them perform their task until God appoints them to another
 greater one.
                                 80
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE