suffering. Absolutely not, for being rich in this case seems to
me like the situation of a person condemned to die who has all
the world's delights placed before him. These delights would
not be sufficient to alleviate his suffering; rather, they would
increase the torment. So it is with this torment; it comes from
above, and earthly things are of no avail in the matter. Our
great God wants us to know our own misery and that He is
king; and this is very important for what lies ahead.
      1 3 . Well then, what will this poor soul do when the tor­
ment goes on for many days? If it prays, it feels as though it
hasn't prayed-as far as consolation goes, I mean. For consola­
tion is not admitted into the soul's interior, nor is what one
recites to oneself, even though vocal, understood. As for mental
prayer, this definitely is not the time for that, because the
faculties are incapable of the practice; rather, solitude causes
greater harm-and also another torment for this soul is that it
be with anyone or that others speak to it. And thus however
much it forces itself not to do so, it goes about with a discon­
tented and ill-tempered mien that is externally very noticeable.
      Is it true that it will know how to explain its experiences?
They are indescribable, for they are spiritual afflictions and
sufferings that one doesn't know what to call. The best remedy
(I don't mean for getting rid of them, because I don't find any,
but so that they may be endured) is to engage in external works
of charity and to hope in the mercy of God, who never fails
those who hope in Him. May He be forever blessed, amen.
      14. Other exterior trials the devils cause must be quite
unusual; and so there's no reason to speak of them. Nor are
they, for the most part, so painful; for, however much the
devils do, they do not, in my opinion, manage to disable the
faculties or disturb the soul in this way. In sum, there's reason
for thinking that they can do no more than what the Lord
allows them to do; and provided one doesn't lose one's mind,
everything is small in comparison with what was mentioned.
      1 5 . We shall be speaking in these dwelling places of other
interior sufferings, and dealing with different kinds of prayer
and favors from the Lord. For even though some favors cause
still more severe suffering than those mentioned, as will be
seen from the condition in which the body is left, they do not
deserve to be called trials. Nor is there any reason for us to

                                1 14
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

write of them since they are such great favors from the Lord.
In the midst of receiving them the soul understands that they
are great favors and far beyond its merits. This severe suffering
comes so that one may enter the seventh dwelling place. It
comes along with many other sufferings, only some of which I
shall speak of9 because it would be impossible to speak of them
all, or even to explain what they are; for they are of a different,
much higher level than those mentioned in this chapter. And if
I haven't been able to explain any more than I did about those
of a lower kind, less will I be able to say of the others. May the
Lord give His help for everything through the merits of His
Son, amen.

                          CHAPTER Two
      Deals with some of the ways in which our Lord awakens the soul.
It seems that there is nothing in these awakenings to fear even though
the experience is sublime and the favors are great.
      1 . Seemingly we have left the little dove far behind; but
we have not, for these are the trials that make it fly still higher.
Well let us begin, then, to discuss the manner in which the
Spouse deals with it and how before He belongs to it complete­
ly He makes it desire Him vehemently by certain delicate
means the soul itself does not understand. (Nor do I believe I'll
be successful in explaining them save to those who have experi­
enced them.) These are impulses so delicate and refined, for
they proceed from very deep within the interior part of the
soul, that I don't know any comparison that will fit.
      2 . They are far different from all that we can acquire of
ourselves here below and even from the spiritual delights that
were mentioned.1 For often when a person is distracted and
forgetful of God, His Majesty will awaken it. His action is as
quick as a falling comet. And as with a thunderclap, even
though no sound is heard, the soul understands very clearly
that it was called by God. So well does it understand that
sometimes, especially in the beginning, it is made to tremble
and even complain without there being anything that causes it
pain. It feels that it is wounded in the most delightful way, but
it doesn't learn how or by whom it was wounded. It knows
clearly that the wound is something precious, and it would
                                 115
                      TERESA OF AVILA

never want to be cured. It complains to its Spouse with words
of love, even outwardly, without being able to do otherwise. It
knows that He is present, but He doesn't want to reveal the
manner in which He allows Himself to be enjoyed. And the
pain is great, although delightful and sweet. And even if the
soul does not want this wound, the wound cannot be avoided.
But the soul, in fact, would never want to be deprived of this
pain. The wound satisfies it much more than the delightful and
painless absorption of the prayer of quiet. 2
     3 . I am struggling, Sisters, to explain for you this action of
love, and I don't know how. For it seems a contradiction that
the Beloved would give the soul clear understanding that He is
with it and yet make it think that He is calling it by a sign so
certain that no room is left for doubt and a whisper so penetrat­
ing that the soul cannot help but hear it. For it seems that
when the Spouse, who is in the seventh dwelling place, com­
municates in this manner (for the words are not spoken), all the
people in the other dwelling places keep still; neither the
senses, nor the imagination, nor the faculties stir.
     0 my powerful God, how sublime are your secrets, and
how different spiritual things are from all that is visible and
understandable here below. There is nothing that serves to
explain this favor, even though the favor is a very small one
when compared with the very great ones You work in souls.
     4. This action of love is so powerful that the soul dissolves
with desire, and yet it doesn't know what to ask for since
clearly it thinks that its God is with it.
     You will ask me: Well, if it knows this, what does it desire
or what pains it? What greater good does it want? I don't know.
I do know that it seems this pain reaches to the soul's very
depths and that when He who wounds it draws out the arrow,
it indeed seems in accord with the deep love the soul feels that
God is drawing these very depths after Him.3 I was thinking
now that it's as though from this fire enkindled in the brazier
that is my God a spark leapt forth and so struck the soul that
the flaming fire was felt by it. And since the spark was not
enough to set the soul on fire, and the fire is so delightful, the
soul is left with that pain; but the spark merely by touching the
soul produces that effect. It seems to me this is the best com-


                                 1 16
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE