leaves a certitude that the soul "was in God and God was in
it."83 Such certitude is not present when the union is merely
partial as in the previous dwelling place. 84
      Here Teresa, never wanting in her attempts to find the
best explanation, turns to another analogy. Leaving aside the
castle and the troughs of water, she finds an unusual compari­
son as an example for explaining what is in her mind: the
silkworm. Through the image of the silkworm she speaks inge­
niously of death and of new life in Christ. In this prayer of
union, God Himself becomes the dwelling place or cocoon in
which a person dies. Once a soul is indeed dead to itself and its
attachments, it breaks forth from the cocoon transformed as
does a small white butterfly.8 s
     Having made the point of the soul's death in Christ, Tere­
sa introduces her final analogy, which serves to lead her read­
ers through the remaining dwelling places to the center of the
castle: marriage and its preparatory stages. In her day, before
two people became engaged, they progressed through certain
stages by which they sought to know first if there was any
likeness between them and then whether there was any chance
for love. If these were affirmatively established, they shared in
additional meetings so as to deepen their knowledge of each
other. In these experiences of union, then, His Majesty is
desirous that the soul may get to know Him better. 86
     Teresa makes a final plea that love be not idle. One so
intimate with His Majesty must walk with special care and
attentiveness in the exercise of virtue and with particular em­
phasis on love of neighbor, humility (the desire to be consid­
ered the least), and the faithful performance of ordinary
tasks.87
     The sixth dwelling places. The longest section of the Interior
Castle is devoted to this stage of the inward journey. Teresa
deals here with many extraordinary mystical phenomena.
Though the spiritual betrothal takes place in these rooms, the
desires of the soul at a cost to itself must first increase. 88
Through both vehement desires for God and the sufferings
these desires cause, the Lord enables the soul to have the
courage to be joined with Him and take Him as its Spouse. 89
Aware that her readers will wonder why all this courage is
necessary for something that should be looked on as an attrac-
                                25
                       INTRODUCTION

tive opportunity, Teresa asserts strongly: "I tell you there is
need for more courage than you think. "90 Without the courage,
which must be given by God, such a union would be impossi­
ble. This fortitude comes through many trials both exterior
and interior: opposition from others; praise (itself becoming a
trial); severe illnesses; inner sufferings, fears, and misunder­
standing on the part of the confessor and the consequent anxi­
ety that God will allow one to be deceived; and a feeling of
unbearable inner oppression and even of being rejected by
God.91
     Other preparations for the betrothal come in the form of
certain spiritual awakenings and impulses deep within the
soul. These are of many kinds and include the woundings of
love that can cause at one and the same time both pain and
delight.92
     The betrothal itself takes place when His Majesty "gives
the soul raptures that draw it out of its senses. For if it were to
see itself so near this great majesty while in its senses, it would
perhaps die."93 Though the soul in ecstasy is without con­
sciousness in its outward life, it was never before so awake to
the things of God nor did it ever before have so deep an
enlightenment and knowledge of God.94
      Besides locutions from God with their beneficial effects,
the soul may now also begin to receive, through intellectual
and imaginative visions, understanding about the divine mys­
teries.95 Accompanying the discussion of these diverse favors
are also many sharp analyses and keenly perceptive rules for
discerning authentic mystical experiences from pseudomystical
phenomena. The effects the authentic favors leave in the soul
are like the jewels the Spouse gives to the betrothed; they are
knowledge of the grandeur of God, self-knowledge together
with humility, and rejection of earthly things except of those
that can be used in the Lord's service.96 Finally, joy will reach
such an excess that the soul will want to be a herald to the
entire world that all might help it praise the Lord.97
      When speaking of the intellectual and imaginative visions
of Christ, Teresa pauses to make some firm assertions about the
human and divine Christ present throughout one's spiritual
pilgrimage. No state is so sublime that a person must always be
occupied with divinity and thus obliged to empty the mind of
all reference to the human Christ. The inability of contempla-
                                26
                      INTRODUCTION

tive souls to engage in discursive thought about the mysteries
of the Passion and the life of Christ in their prayer is very
common, Teresa holds. But contemplating these mysteries,
"dwelling on them with a simple gaze," in Teresa's words,
"will not impede the most sublime prayer."98 On the contrary,
an effort to forget Christ and live in continual absorption in
the divinity will result in a failure to enter the last two dwell­
ing places. Teresa is most insistent on this. The purification of
the person is realized not merely through the sufferings inher­
ent in the human condition but especially through contact with
the person of Christ in his humanity and divinity.
     Through these many favors and purifications, the desires of
love are always increasing and the flight of the butterfly is ever
more restless. These desires reach a point of extreme spiritual
torment, causing the soul a final purification of the spirit
before entering the seventh dwelling place, "just as those who
will enter heaven must be cleansed in purgatory."99 Not only
can this intense spiritual torment cause ecstasy, as can intense
spiritual joy, but it can also place one in danger of death. 1 00
Nonetheless, the soul is aware that this spiritual suffering is a
precious favor.
     The seventh dwelling places. On account of these moments of
great illumination, Teresa is able to teach that there are no
closed doors between the sixth and the seventh dwelling places.
If she divides them, it is "because there are things in the last
that are not revealed to those who have not yet reached it." 101
In the prayer of union explained in the fifth dwelling place and
in the raptures of the sixth, the Lord makes the soul blind and
deaf as was Saint Paul in his conversion. When God joins the
soul to Himself, it does not understand anything of the nature
and kind of favor enjoyed. 102 But in the seventh dwelling place
the union is wrought differently: "Our good God now desires
to remove the scales from the soul's eyes and let it see and
understand, although in a strange way, something of the favor
He grants it."103 Now fortified, a person lifted up to these
exalted mysteries no longer loses equilibrium or falls into
ecstasy, but rather experiences them as a proper object, as
connatural.
     Entry into these last and most luminous dwelling places
takes place through an amazing intellectual vision of the Most
Blessed Trinity. Teresa places much emphasis on the depth at
                                27
                        INTRODUCTION