4. But one thing I advise you: not because you have such a
Mother or patroness should you feel secure, for David was very
holy, and you already know who Solomon was. Don't pay any
attention to the enclosure and the penance in which you live,
or feel safe in the fact that you are always conversing with God
and practicing such continual prayer and being so withdrawn
from the world of things and, in your opinion, holding them in
abhorrence. These practices are all good, but not a sufficient
reason, as I have said,4 for us to stop fearing. So, continue to
say this verse and often bear it in mind: Beatus vir qui timet
Dominum.5
     5. I don't remember what I was speaking about, for I have
digressed a great deal and in thinking of myself I feel helpless,
as a bird with broken wings, when it comes to saying anything
good. So I want to leave this matter aside for now. Let me get
back to what I began telling you6 concerning souls that have
entered the third dwelling places, for the Lord has done them
no small favor, but a very great one, in letting them get
through the first difficulties. I believe that through the good­
ness of God there are many of these souls in the world. They
long not to offend His Majesty, even guarding themselves
against venial sins; they are fond of doing penance and setting
aside periods for recollection; they spend their time well, prac­
ticing works of charity toward their neighbors, and are very
balanced in their use of speech and dress and in the governing
of their households-those who have them. Certainly, this is a
state to be desired. And, in my opinion, there is no reason why
entrance even into the final dwelling place should be denied
these souls, nor will the Lord deny them this entrance if they
desire it; for such a desire is an excellent way to prepare oneself
so that every favor may be granted.
     6. 0 Jesus, and who will say that he doesn't want a good so
wonderful, especially after having passed through the most
difficult trial? No, nobody will. We all say that we want this
good. But since there is need of still more in order that the soul
possess the Lord completely, it is not enough to say we want it,
just as this was not enough for the young man whom the Lord
told what one must do in order to be perfect. 7 From the time I
began to speak of these dwelling places I have had this young
man in mind. For we are literally like him, and ordinarily the
                                57
                     TERESA OF AVILA

great dryness in prayer comes from this, although it also has
other causes. And I'm leaving aside mention of some interior
trials that many good souls undergo (unbearable trials and not
at all due to their own fault), from which the Lord always frees
them to their own great benefit, and mention of those who
suffer from melancholy and other illnesses. Briefly, in all
things we have to let God be the judge. What I've said, I
believe, is what usually happens; for since these souls realize
that they wouldn't commit a sin for anything-many wouldn't
even advertently commit a venial sin-and that they conduct
their lives and households well, they cannot accept patiently
that the door of entry to the place where our King dwells be
closed to them who consider themselves His vassals. But even
though a king here on earth has many vassals, not all enter his
chamber. Enter, enter, my daughters, into the interior rooms;
pass on from your little works. By the mere fact that you are
Christians you must do all these things and much more. It is
enough for you to be God's vassals; don't let your desire be for
so much that as a result you will be left with nothing. Behold
the saints who entered this King's chamber, and you will see
the difference between them and us. Don't ask for what you
have not deserved, nor should it enter our minds that we have
merited this favor however much we may have served-we
who have offended God.
      7. 0 humility, humility! I don't know what kind of temp­
tation I'm undergoing in this matter that I cannot help but
think that anyone who makes such an issue of this dryness is a
little lacking in humility. I said that I've omitted mention of
those great interior trials I've referred to,8 for those involve
much more than just a lack of devotion. Let us prove ourselves,
my Sisters, or let the Lord prove us, for He knows well how to
do this even though we often don't want to understand it. Let
us speak now of those souls whose lives are so well ordered; let
us recognize what they do for God, and we shall at once see
how we have no reason for complaining of His Majesty. If, like
the young man in the gospel, we turn our backs and go away
sad9 when the Lord tells us what we must do to be perfect,
what do you want His Majesty to do? For He must give the
reward in conformity with the love we have for Him. And this
love, daughters, must not be fabricated in our imaginations but
                               58
                 THE INTERIOR CASTLE

proved by deeds. And don't think He needs our works; He
needs the determination of our wills.
     8. We seem to think that everything is done when we
willingly take and wear the religious habit and abandon all
worldly things and possessions for Him-even though these
possessions may amount to no more than the nets Saint Peter
possessed 10-for he who gives what he has thinks he gives
enough. This renunciation is a good enough preparation if one
perseveres in it and doesn't turn back and become involved
with the vermin in the first rooms, even if it be only in desire.
There is no doubt that if a person perseveres in this nakedness
and detachment from all worldly things he will reach his goal.
But this perseverance includes the condition-and behold that
I am advising you of this-that you consider yourselves useless
servants, as Saint Paul, or Christ, says;1 1 and believe that you
have not put our Lord under any obligation to grant you these
kinds of favors. Rather, as one who has received more, you are
more indebted. 1 2 What can we do for a God so generous that
He died for us, created us, and gives us being? Shouldn't we
consider ourselves lucky to be able to repay something of what
we owe Him for His service toward us? I say these words "His
service toward us" unwillingly; but the fact is that He did
nothing else but serve us all the time He lived in this world.
And yet we ask Him again for favors and gifts.
     9. Reflect a great deal, daughters, on some of the things
that are here pointed out, even though in a jumbled way, for I
don't know how to explain them further. The Lord will give
you understanding of them so that out of dryness you may
draw humility-and not disquiet, which is what the devil aims
for. Be convinced that where humility is truly present God will
give a peace and conformity-even though He may never give
consolations-by which one will walk with greater content­
ment than will others with their consolations. For often, as you
have read, 13 the divine Majesty gives these consolations to the
weaker souls, although I think we would not exchange these
consolations for the fortitude of those who walk in dryness. We
are fonder of consolations than we are of the cross. Test us,
Lord-for You know the truth-so that we may know our­
selves.


                               59
                        TERESA OF AVILA

                           CHAPTER Two