good that would enable them to merit, and blind and deaf. We
can rightly take pity on them and reflect that at one time we
were ourselves in this condition and that the Lord can also
have mercy on them.
     4. Let us take special care, Sisters, to beg this mercy of
Him and not be careless, for it is a most generous alms to pray
for those who are in mortal sin. Suppose we were to see a
Christian with his hands fastened behind his back by a strong
chain, bound to a post, and dying of hunger, not because of lack
of food, for there are very choice dishes beside him, but because
he cannot take hold of the food and eat, and even has great
loathing for it; and suppose he sees that he is about to breathe
his last and die, not just an earthly death but an eternal one.
Wouldn't it be a terrible cruelty to stand looking at him and
not feed him? Well, then, what if through your prayer the
chains could be loosed? The answer is obvious. For the love of
God I ask you always to remember in your prayers souls in
mortal sin.
     5. We are not speaking about them now but about those
who already by the mercy of God have done penance for their
sins and are in the state of grace. Thus we are not reflecting
about something restricted to a corner but about an interior
world where there is room for so many and such attractive
dwelling places, as you have seen; and indeed it is right that the
soul be like this since within it there is a dwelling place for
God.
     Now then, when His Majesty is pleased to grant the soul
this divine marriage that was mentioned,2 He first brings it
into His own dwelling place. He desires that the favor be
different from what it was at other times when He gave the
soul raptures. I really believe that in rapture He unites it with
Himself, as well as in the prayer of union that was mentioned.3
But it doesn't seem to the soul that it is called to enter into its
center, as it is here in this dwelling place, but called to the
superior part. These things matter little; whether the experi­
ence comes in one way or another, the Lord joins the soul to
Himself. But He does so by making it blind and deaf, as was
Saint Paul in his conversion, 4 and by taking away perception of
the nature and kind of favor enjoyed, for the great delight the


                                1 74
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

soul then feels is to see itself near God. Yet when He joins it to
Himself, it doesn't understand anything; for all the faculties
are lost.
     6. In this seventh dwelling place the union comes about in
a different way: Our good God now desires to remove the
scales from the soul's eyes and let it see and understand, al­
though in a strange way, something of the favor He grants it.
When the soul is brought into that dwelling place, the Most
Blessed Trinity, all three Persons, through an intellectual vi­
sion, is revealed to it through a certain representation of the
truth. First there comes an enkindling in the spirit in the
manner of a cloud of magnificent splendor; and these Persons
are distinct, and through an admirable knowledge the soul
understands as a most profound truth that all three Persons are
one substance and one power and one knowledge and one God
alone. It knows in such a way that what we hold by faith, it
understands, we can say, through sight-although the sight is
not with the bodily eyes nor with the eyes of the soul, because
we are not dealing with an imaginative vision. Here all three
Persons communicate themselves to it, speak to it, and explain
those words of the Lord in the Gospel: that He and the Father
and the Holy Spirit will come to dwell with the soul that loves
Him and keeps His commandments. 5
      7. 0 God help me! How different is hearing and believing
these words from understanding their truth in this way! Each
day this soul becomes more amazed, for these Persons never
seem to leave it any more, but it clearly beholds, in the way
that was mentioned, 6 that they are within it. In the extreme
interior, in some place very deep within itself, the nature of
which it doesn't know how to explain, because of a lack of
learning, it perceives this divine company.
     8. You may think that as a result the soul will be outside
itself and so absorbed that it will be unable to be occupied with
anything else. On the contrary, the soul is much more occupied
than before with everything pertaining to the service of God,
and once its duties are over it remains with that enjoyable
company. If the soul does not fail God, He will never fail, in
my opinion, to make His presence clearly known to it. It has
strong confidence that since God has granted this favor He will


                               1 75
                      TERESA OF AVILA

not allow it to lose the favor. Though the soul thinks this, it
goes about with greater care than ever not to displease Him in
anything.
      9. It should be understood that this presence is not felt so
fully, I mean so clearly, as when revealed the first time or at
other times when God grants the soul this gift. For if the
presence were felt so clearly, the soul would find it impossible
to be engaged in anything else or even to live among people.
But even though the presence is not perceived with this very
clear light, the soul finds itself in this company every time it
takes notice. Let's say that the experience resembles that of a
person who after being in a bright room with others finds
himself, once the shutters are closed, in darkness. The light by
which he could see them is taken away. Until it returns he
doesn't see them, but not for that reason does he stop knowing
they are present. It might be asked whether the soul can see
them when it so desires and the light returns. To see them does
not lie in its power, but depends on when our Lord desires that
the window of the intellect be opened. Great is the mercy He
shows in never departing from the soul and in desiring that it
perceive Him so manifestly.
      10. It seems that the divine Majesty desires, through this
wonderful company, to prepare the soul for more. Clearly, the
soul will be truly helped in every way to advance in perfection
and to lose the fear it sometimes had of the other favors He
granted it, as was said. 7 Such was the experience of this per­
son, 8 for in everything she found herself improved, and it
seemed to her, despite the trials she underwent and the busi­
ness affairs she had to attend to, that the essential part of her
soul never moved from that room. As a result, it seemed to her
that there was, in a certain way, a division in her soul. And
while suffering some great trials a little after God granted her
this favor, she complained of that part of the soul, as Martha
complained of Mary,9 and sometimes pointed out that it was
there always enjoying that quietude at its own pleasure while
leaving her in the midst of so many trials and occupations that
she could not keep it company.
      1 1 . This will seem to you, daughters, to be foolishness, but
it truly happens in this way. Although we know that the soul is
all one, what I say is no mere fancy; the experience is very
                                 1 76
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE