Saint Jerome, though he was a saint, kept it in mind. And thus
all that we suffer here in the strict observance of the religious
life will seem to us nothing; for, however long it lasts, it lasts
but a moment in comparison with eternity. I tell you truthfully
that as wretched as I am I have never had fear of the torments
of hell, for they would be nothing if compared to what I recall
the condemned will experience on seeing the anger in these
eyes of the Lord, so beautiful, meek, and kind. It doesn't seem
my heart could suffer such a sight. I've felt this way all my life.
How much more will the person fear this sight to whom the
Lord has thus represented Himself since the experience is so
powerful that it carries that person out of his senses. The
reason the soul is suspended must be that the Lord helps its
weakness, which is joined to His greatness in this sublime
communication.
     8. When the soul can remain a long while gazing on this
Lord, I don't believe it will be experiencing a vision but some
intense reflection in which some likeness is fashioned in the
imagination; compared with a vision this likeness is similar to
something dead.
     9. It happens to some persons (and I know this is true, for
they have spoken with me-and not just three or four but
many) that their imagination is so weak, or their intellect so
effective, or I don't know what the cause is, that they become
absorbed in their imagination to the extent that everything
they think about seems to be clearly seen. Yet, if they were to
see a real vision, they would know without any doubt whatso­
ever their mistake, for they themselves are composing what
they see with their imagination. This imagining doesn't have
any effect afterward, but they are left cold-much more than if
they were to see a devotional image. It's very wise not to pay
any attention to this kind of imagining and thus what was seen
is forgotten much more than a dream.
      10. In the vision we are dealing with the above is not so;
rather, while the soul is very far from thinking that anything
will be seen, or having the thought even pass through its mind,
suddenly the vision is represented to it all at once and stirs all
the faculties and senses with a great fear and tumult so as to
place them afterward in that happy peace. Just as there was a
tempest and tumult that came from heaven when Saint Paul
                                1 58
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

was hurled to the ground,6 here in this interior world there is a
great stirring; and in a moment, as I have said, 7 all remains
calm, and this soul is left so well instructed about so many
great truths that it has no need of any other master. For
without any effort on the soul's part, true Wisdom has taken
away the mind's dullness and leaves a certitude, which lasts for
some time, that this favor is from God. However much the soul
is told the contrary, others cannot then cause it fear that there
could be any deception. Afterward, if the confessor puts fear in
it, God allows it to· waver and think that because of its sins it
could possibly be deceived. But it does not believe this; rather,
as I have said concerning those other things, 8 the devil can stir
up doubts, as he does with temptations against matters of faith,
that do not allow the soul to be firm in its certitude. But the
more the devil fights against that certitude, the more certain
the soul is that the devil could not have left it with so many
blessings, as they really are, for he cannot do so much in the
interior of the soul. The devil can present a vision, but not with
this truth and majesty and these results.
      1 1 . Since the confessors cannot witness this vision-nor,
perhaps, can it be explained by the one to whom God grants
this favor-they fear and rightly so. Thus it's necessary to
proceed with caution, wait for the time when these apparitions
will bear fruit, and move along little by little looking for the
humility they leave in the soul and the fortitude in virtue. If
the vision is from the devil, he will soon show a sign, and will
be caught in a thousand lies. If the confessor has experience
and has undergone these experiences, he needs little time for
discernment; immediately in the account given he will see
whether the vision is from God or the imagination or the devil,
especially if His Majesty has given him the gift of discernment
of spirits. If he has this latter as well as learning, even though
he may have no experience, he will recognize the true vision
very well.
      1 2. What is necessary, Sisters, is that you proceed very
openly and truthfully with your confessor. I don't mean in
regard to telling your sins, for that is obvious, but in giving an
account of your prayer. If you do not give such an account, I
am not sure you are proceeding well, nor that it is God who is
teaching you. He is very fond of our speaking as truthfully and
                               1 59
                     TERESA     OF A VILA

clearly to the one who stands in His place as we would to Him
and of our desiring that the confessor understand all our
thoughts and even more our deeds, however small they be. If
you do this you don't have to go about disturbed or worried.
Even if the vision is not from God, it will do you no harm if
you have humility and a good conscience. His Majesty knows
how to draw good from evil, and the road along which the devil
wanted to make you go astray will be to your greater gain.
Thinking that God grants you such wonderful favors, you will
force yourselves to please Him more and be always remember­
ing His image. As a very learned man said,9 the devil is a great
painter and if the devil were to show him a living image of the
Lord, he wouldn't be grieved but allow the image to awaken
his devotion, and that he would thereby wage war on the devil
with the evil one's own wickedness. Even though a painter may
be a very poor one, a person shouldn't on that account fail to
reverence the image he makes if it is a painting of our every
Good.
     1 3 . That learned man was strongly opposed to the advice
some gave about making the fig10 when seeing a vision, for he
used to say that wherever we see a painting of our King we
must reverence it. And I see that he is right, because even here
below a similar action would be regretted: If a person knew
that before a portrait of himself another whom he loved mani­
fested such contempt, he would be unhappy about the act. Well
how much greater reason there is always to have respect for
any crucifix or portrait we see of our Emperor? Although I
have written of this elsewhere, 1 1 I am glad to write of it here,
for I saw that a person went about in distress when ordered to
use this remedy. 12 I don't know who invented a thing that
could so torment a person who wasn't able to do anything else
than obey, if the confessor gave her this counsel, because she
thought she would go astray if she didn't obey. My counsel is
that even though a confessor gives you such advice, you should
humbly tell him this reason and not accept his counsel. The
good reasons given me by that learned man I found very
acceptable.
     14. A wonderful benefit the soul draws from this favor of
the Lord is that when it thinks of Him or of His life and


                               160
                 THE INTERIOR CASTLE