the soul and causes the greatest confusion. The evil of offend­
ing God is seen more clearly, because while being in God
Himself (I mean being within Him) we commit great evils. I
want to draw a comparison-if I succeed-so as to explain this
to you. For although what I said is true, and we hear it often,
either we do not pay attention to this truth or we do not want
to understand it. If the matter were understood, it doesn't seem
it would be possible to be so bold.
       3. Let's suppose that God is like an immense and beautiful
dwelling or palace and that this palace, as I say, is God Him­
self. 2 Could the sinner, perhaps, so as to engage in his evil deeds
leave this palace? No, certainly not; rather, within the palace
itself, that is within God Himself, the abominations, indecent
actions, and evil deeds committed by us sinners take place. 0
frightful thought, worthy of deep reflection, and very benefi­
cial for those of us who know little. We don't completely
understand these truths, for otherwise it wouldn't be possible
to be so foolishly audacious! Let us consider, Sisters, the great
mercy and compassion of God in not immediately destroying
us there, and be extremely thankful to Him, and let us be
ashamed to feel resentment about anything that is said or done
against us. The greatest evil of the world is that God, our
Creator, suffers so many evil things from His creatures within
His very self and that we sometimes resent a word said in our
absence and perhaps with no evil intention.
      4. 0 human misery! When, daughters, will we imitate this
great God? Oh, let us not think we are doing anything by
suffering injuries, but we should very eagerly endure every­
thing, and let us love the one who offends us since this great
God has not ceased to love us even though we have offended
Him very much. Thus the Lord is right in wanting all to
pardon the wrongs done to them. 3
      I tell you, daughters, that even though this vision passes
quickly it is a great favor from our Lord if one desires to
benefit from it by keeping it habitually present.
       5. It also happens very quickly and ineffably that God will
show within Himself a truth that seems to leave in obscurity all
those there are in creatures, and one understands very clearly
that God alone is Truth, unable to lie.4 What David says in a
psalm about every man's being a liar is clearly understood.5
                                 164
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

However frequently the verse may be heard, it is never under­
stood as it is in this vision. God is everlasting Truth. I am
reminded of Pilate, how he was often questioning our Lord
when during the Passion he asked Him, "What is truth?"6 and
of the little we understand here below about this supreme
Truth.
     6. I would like to be able to explain more about this, but it
is unexplainable. Let us conclude, Sisters, that in order to live
in conformity with our God and Spouse in something, it will
be well if we always study diligently how to walk in this truth.
I'm not merely saying that we should not tell lies, for in that
regard, glory to God, I already notice that you take great care
in these houses not to tell a lie for anything. I'm saying that we
should walk in truth before God and people in as many ways as
possible. Especially, there should be no desire that others con­
sider us better than we are. And in our works we should
attribute to God what is His and to ourselves what is ours and
strive to draw out the truth in everything. Thus, we shall have
little esteem for this world, which is a complete lie and false­
 hood, and as such will not endure.
      7. Once I was pondering why our Lord was so fond of this
virtue of humility, and this thought came to me-in my opin­
ion not as a result of reflection but suddenly: It is because God
is supreme Truth; and to be humble is to walk in truth, for it is
a very deep truth that of ourselves we have nothing good but
only misery and nothingness. Whoever does not understand
this walks in falsehood. The more anyone understands it the
more he pleases the supreme Truth because he is walking in
truth. Please God, Sisters, we will be granted the favor never to
leave this path of self-knowledge, amen.
      8. Our Lord grants these favors to the soul because, as to
one to whom He is truly betrothed, one who is already deter­
 mined to do His will in everything, He desires to give it some
 knowledge of how to do His will and of His grandeurs. There's
 no reason to deal with more than these two things I men­
tioned' since they seem to me very beneficial. In similar things
there is nothing to fear; rather, the Lord should be praised
because He gives them. The devil, in my opinion, and even
one's own imagination have little capacity at this level, and so
the soul is left with profound satisfaction.
                               165
                       TERESA OF AVILA

                        CHAPTER ELEVEN

     Treats of some desires God gives the soul that are so poweiful and
vehement they place it in danger of death. Treats also of the benefits
caused by this favor the Lord grants.
     1 . Do you think that all these favors the Spouse has be­
stowed on the soul will be sufficient to satisfy the little dove or
butterfly-don't think I have forgotten it-so that it may come
to rest in the place where it will die? No, certainly not; rather
this little butterfly is much worse. Even though it may have
been receiving these favors for many years, it always moans
and goes about sorrowful because they leave it with greater
pain. The reason is that since it is getting to know ever more
the grandeurs of its God and sees itself so distant and far from
enjoying Him, the desire for the Lord increases much more;
also, love increases in the measure the soul discovers how much
this great God and Lord deserves to be loved. And this desire
continues, gradually growing in these years so that it reaches a
point of suffering as great as that I shall now speak of. I have
said "years" so as to be in line with the experience of that
person I've mentioned here, 1 for I well understand that one
must not put limits on God; in a moment He can bring a soul
to the lofty experience mentioned here. His Majesty has the
power to do whatever He wants and is eager to do many things
for us.
     2. Well, here is what happens sometimes to a soul that
experiences these anxious longings, tears, sighs, and great im­
pulses that were mentioned2 (for all of these seem to proceed
from our love with deep feelings, but they are all nothing in
comparison with this other experience that I'm going to ex­
plain, for they resemble a smoking fire that though painful can
be endured). While this soul is going about in this manner,
burning up within itself, a blow is felt from elsewhere (the soul
doesn't understand from where or how). The blow comes often
through a sudden thought or word about death's delay. Or the
soul will feel pierced by a fiery arrow.3 I don't say that there is
an arrow, but whatever the experience, the soul realizes clearly
that the feeling couldn't come about naturally. Neither is the
experience that of a blow, although I said "blow"; but it causes
a sharp wound. And, in my opinion, it isn't felt where earthly
                                  166
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE