human persons was strangely enough denied by some of the
priests Teresa consulted, and their denial troubled her until a
Dominican theologian, Fr. Vicente Barron, explained that God
is indeed present even when a soul is not in His grace.
     Some books Teresa had read induced her to think that
because of the passive prayer she experienced, the time had
come for a more abstract manner of procedure and that atten­
tion to the human Christ would impede her absorption in
union, but she soon discovered her error and later in her
teaching insisted that to turn aside from Christ in one's spiritu­
al journey would end in failure to arrive at the highest stages of
that journey, the final rooms of the interior castle. 17
     Some time after she had corrected this error, a new mode
of experiencing Christ's presence carne into her life. 1 8 In 1 5 56,
in her first experience of rapture, Teresa heard, not through
her bodily ears but in her soul, Christ speaking to her. About
two years later, in addition to the locutions that were now oc­
curring, she knew through what she calls an intellectual vision,
that is, one without external or internal image, that Jesus
Christ was at her side. This vision did not pass but formed a
part of her everyday life. 19 Then, though of a less spiritual
quality but still beneficial to Teresa's growth, carne the imagi­
native but transitory visions of Christ. In this latter form, the
Lord showed Himself to her in His glorious risen body. Yet
this was done not all at once: first His hands, then, a few days
later, His face, then, "this most sacred humanity in its risen
form was represented to me completely . . . with wonderful
beauty and rnajesty."20 Human weakness could not have borne
such shining beauty and glory all together and at once. As for
the presence of Christ in the intellectual and more sublime
vision, Teresa writes: "In the prayer of union or quiet some
impressions of the Divinity are bestowed; in the vision, along
with the impressions, you see that also the most sacred human­
ity accompanies us and desires to grant us favors."21
      The last stage in Teresa's journey was marked by a series
 of experiences of the mystery of the Trinity. Deep within her
 spirit she perceived an area reserved for communion with the
 persons of the Blessed Trinity. In 1 5 7 1, after she had expound­
 ed much of her doctrine on prayer in both the Life and the Way
 of Perfection, yet a further inner depth was revealed; and Teresa

                                 7
                       INTRODUCTION

insists repeatedly on the profundity of the area in which her
experience now takes place. Here was shown to her, in the
fullness of light through an intellectual vision, the presence of
the three Persons of the Blessed Trinity. Though this presence
was not afterward always felt in such light and intensity, she
did enjoy habitually the company of these three Persons.22
Now, mystically, she understood the words in John's gospel
about the indwelling of the divine Persons.23 Shortly afterward
she experienced, on the other hand, that she herself was dwell­
ing in God: "It seemed to me there came the thought of how a
sponge absorbs and is saturated with water; so, I thought, was
my soul, which was overflowing with that divinity and in a
certain way rejoicing within itself and possessing the three
Persons. I also heard the words: 'Don't try to hold Me within
yourself, but try to hold yourself within Me.' "24
     This new companionship of the three Persons did not
impede her intellectual vision of Christ's humanity. On No­
vember 1 8, 1 572, she received the grace of the spiritual mar­
riage through an imaginative vision of the humanity of Christ
in which He told her that from then on she should consider as
her own all that belonged to Him and that He would take care
of what was hers.25 Among the fruits of these awesome favors
was fortitude, the strength necessary for a life in imitation of
Christ and for the service and good works that are the fruit of
spiritual marriage. The fruit in Teresa's case was, among oth­
ers, both the new Carmels and her writings.

                            SOURCES
     The books that influenced Teresa at one or another phase
of her life were for the most part writings of recognized value.
The Letters of St. Jerome, The Morals of St. Gregory the Great, and
The Confessions of St. Augustine represented the Church Fathers.
In this category there were also selections from the Vitae Pa­
trum, the Collationes of Cassian, and the pseudo-Augustinian
Soliloquys and Meditations. The medieval classics that she read
were the Flos Sanctorum, probably by De Voragine; The Life of
Christ by Ludolph of Saxony; and The Imitation of Christ. Among
contemporary Spanish authors she read Luis de Granada,


                                 8
                       INTRODUCTION

Saint Peter of Alcantara, Francisco de Osuna, Bernardino de
Laredo, Alonso de Madrid, and Bernabe de Palma.
     Whether or not Teresa received any spiritual instruction
during her novitiate training, it is difficult to discern. Certain­
ly on the occasion of her first foundation she did make a study
of the Carmelite rule, The Rule ofSt. Albert. When the Inquisitor
General, Don Fernando Valdes, published the notorious Index
of forbidden books in 1 5 59, Teresa complied and parted with a
number of her cherished books. Afterward she heard these
words from the Lord: "Don't be sad, for I shall give you a
living book."26 From then on Teresa felt little need for books;
the Lord Himself became a living book from whom she drew
the clear water of divine wisdom. More than ever before, the
words of the gospels spoke to her with splendid eloquence, and
she attests to the particular power they possessed to bring
recollection to her soul.27
     Finally, the inquisitive mind of Teresa discovered another
source of learning and spirituality in theologians, such as the
Dominicans Pedro Ibanez and Domingo Banez, and in saints,
such as Peter of Alcantara, Francis Borgia, and John of the
Cross (who also, like Teresa, was proclaimed a Doctor of the
Church in this twentieth century).

                           HER STYLE
     In the Bible we read both the great and the small stories of
salvation in a synthesis of episodes and doctrine. So, too, in
Teresa's testimony, there is a continual interplay between ex­
perience and doctrine. The weft of her theoretical and practical
teaching is skillfully carried through the warp of her concrete
experience. But despite her gifts, writing for this sixteenth­
century woman was a dreaded chore. Her health and energy
were often not up to it. At the beginning, especially, of this call
and even command to write, she felt powerless, unable to
communicate what was of another world; and there was always
that repugnance toward narrating graces of which she believed
firmly she was unworthy. How much she would rather spend
her time spinning, she protests. But once a work was undertak­
en, she came to know often the forcefulness of inspiration and


                                 9
                      INTRODUCTION