sufferings are felt, but in the very deep and intimate part of the
soul, where this sudden flash of lightning reduces to dust
everything it finds in this earthly nature of ours; for while this
experience lasts nothing can be remembered about our being.
In an instant the experience so binds the faculties that they
have no freedom for anything except those things that will
make this pain increase.
     3 . I wouldn't want what I say to appear to be an exaggera­
tion. Indeed, I see that my words fall short because the experi­
ence is unexplainable. It is an enrapturing of the faculties and
senses away from everything that is not a help, as I said, to
feeling this affliction. For the intellect is very alive to under­
standing the reason why the soul feels far from God; and His
Majesty helps at that time with a vivid knowledge of Himself
in such a way that the pain increases to a point that makes the
one who experiences it begin to cry aloud. Though she is a
person who has suffered and is used to suffering severe pains,
she cannot then do otherwise. This feeling is not in the body,
as was said,4 but in the interior part of the soul. As a result, this
person understood how much more severe the feelings of the
soul are than those of the body, and she reflected that such
must be the nature of the sufferings of souls in purgatory, for
the fact that these souls have no body doesn't keep them from
suffering much more than they do through all the bodily
sufferings they endure here on earth.
     4. I saw a person in this condition; truly she thought she
was dying, and this was not so surprising because certainly
there is great danger of death. 5 And thus, even though the
experience lasts a short while, it leaves the body very disjoint­
ed, and during that time the heart beat is as slow as it would be
if a person were about to render his soul to God. This is no
exaggeration, for the natural heat fails, and the fire so burns
the soul that with a little more intensity God would have
fulfilled the soul's desires. This is true not because a person
feels little or much pain in the body, although it is disjointed, as
I said, in such a way that for three or four days afterward one
feels great sufferings and doesn't even have the strength to
write. And it even seems to me always that the body is left
weaker. The reason one doesn't feel the pain must be that the
interior feeling of the soul is so much greater that one doesn't

                                 167
                      TERESA OF AVILA

pay any attention to the body. When one experiences a very
sharp bodily pain, other bodily pains are hardly felt even
though there may be many. I have indeed experienced this.
With the presence of this spiritual pain, I don't believe that
physical pain would be felt, little or much, even if the body
were cut in pieces.
      5. You will tell me that this feeling is an imperfection and
ask why the soul doesn't conform to the will of God since it is
so surrendered to Him. Until now it could do this, and has
spent its life doing so. As for now, the reasoning faculty is in
such a condition that the soul is not the master of it, nor can
the soul think of anything else than of why it is grieving, of
how it is absent from its Good, and of why it should want to
live. It feels a strange solitude because no creature in all the
earth provides it company, nor do I believe would any heaven­
ly creature, not being the One whom it loves; rather, every­
thing torments it. But the soul sees that it is like a person
hanging, who cannot support himself on any earthly thing; nor
can it ascend to heaven. On fire with this thirst, it cannot get to
the water; and the thirst is not one that is endurable but
already at such a point that nothing will take it away. Nor does
the soul desire that the thirst be taken away save by that water
of which our Lord spoke to the Samaritan woman. 6 Yet no one
gives such water to the soul.
      6. 0 God, help me! Lord, how You afflict your lovers! But
everything is small in comparison with what You give them
afterward. It's natural that what is worth much costs much.
Moreover, if the suffering is to purify this soul so that it might
enter the seventh dwelling place-just as those who will enter
heaven must be cleansed in purgatory-it is as small as a drop
of water in the sea. Furthermore, in spite of all this torment
and affliction, which cannot be surpassed, I believe, by any
earthly afflictions (for this person had suffered many bodily as
well as spiritual pains, but they all seemed nothing in compari­
son with this suffering), the soul feels that the pain is precious;
so precious-it understands very well-that one could not
deserve it. However, this awareness is not of a kind that allevi­
ates the suffering in any way. But with this knowledge, the
soul suffers the pain very willingly and would suffer it all its
life, if God were to be thereby served; although the soul would
                                168
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

not then die once but be always dying, for truly the suffering is
no less than death.
      7. Well, let us consider, Sisters, those who are in hell, who
do not have this conformity or this consolation and spiritual
delight that is placed by God in the soul; nor do they see that
their suffering is beneficial, but they always suffer more and
more. The torments of the soul are so much more severe than
those of the body, and the torment souls in hell suffer is
incomparably greater than the suffering we have here men­
tioned, and must, it is seen, last forever and ever. What, then,
will the suffering of these unfortunate souls be? And what can
we do or suffer in so short a life that would amount to anything
if we were thereby to free ourselves of those terrible and
eternal torments? I tell you it would be impossible to explain
how keenly felt is the suffering of the soul, and how different it
is from that of the body, if one had not experienced these
things. And the Lord Himself desires that we understand this
so that we may know the extraordinary debt we owe Him for
bringing us to a state in which through His mercy we hope He
will free us and pardon our sins.
      8. Well, to return to what we were dealing with7-for we
left this soul with much pain-this pain lasts only a short while
in such intensity. At the most it will last three or four hours, in
my opinion, because if it were to last a long while natural
weakness would not be able to endure it unless by a miracle. It
has happened that the experience lasted no more than a quarter
of an hour but left the soul in pieces. Truly, that time the
person lost her senses completely, and the pain came in its
rigor merely from her hearing a word about life's not ending.
This happened while she was engaged in conversation during
Easter week, the last day of the octave, after she had spent all of
Easter in so much dryness she almost didn't know it was
Easter. In no way can the soul resist. It can no more do so than
it can, if thrown in a fire, stop flames from having heat and
 burning it. This feeling is not one that can be concealed from
others, but those who are present are aware of the great danger
in which the person lies, although they cannot be witnesses to
what is taking place interiorly. True, they provide some com­
pany, as though they were shadows; and so, like shadows, do all
earthly things appear to that person.
                                169
                      TERESA OF AVILA