TERESA'S LIFE
      Teresa was born in Avila, Spain, on March 28, 1 5 1 5, and
lived at a time in which her country had become the greatest
power on earth. Her deeply religious father, Don Alonso San­
chez de Cepeda, after the death of his first wife and with two
children from that marriage, wed Dona Beatriz de Ahumada,
who was only fifteen at the time. Dona Beatriz died at the age
of thirty-three and left behind her ten children among whom
was Teresa. Twelve years old when her mother died, Teresa, a
couple of years later, was placed by her father in a school
(under the charge of the Augustinian nuns) for girls from the
nobility. As her father had hoped, Teresa benefitted by the
pious Christian atmosphere of the school; but, as he had not
expected, she began to feel the first attraction to the religious
life. After reading the Letters of St. Jerome, she decided that she

                                 1
                       INTRODUCTION

must follow the call to enter religion. But her father, strongly
attached to this favorite daughter, was unwilling to allow her
to leave. On November 2, 1 5 3 5, she fled home and entered the
Carmelite Monastery of the Incarnation in Avila itself. This
separation from her father, although accomplished by stealth,
did not come easily, and she later recalled that it felt like every
bone in her body was being sundered. 3 Once the deed was
done, Don Alonso acquiesced, and his daughter entered into
her new life enthusiastically. She made her profession two
years later. In autumn 1 538 she became seriously ill, and when
doctors were unable to determine the cause or find a remedy,
she had to leave the cloister to undergo experimentation with
some more drastic methods of cure used by a woman in the
town of Becedas who had acquired a fame for them. The result
was nearly death for Teresa. After being in a coma for three
days, without any signs of life-indeed, believed to be dead­
Teresa somehow revived. Yet she was left so paralyzed that
three years later she was still unable to walk. Her acute suffer­
ings remained in part for the rest of her life.
     The events surrounding the saint's illness led to her read­
ing Saint Gregory the Great's Morals, and through this classic
Teresa discovered the riches of biblical thought and the drama
of Job. She read, too, the Franciscan friar De Osuna's Third
Spiritual Alphabet. This work became a guide for her life of
prayer. Her initial efforts at mental prayer were favored with
the first experiences of mystical prayer. After regaining a good
measure of her health (she attributes her cure to Saint Joseph
and recommends him as an advocate),4 she passed through in
the following years a tedious and long period of difficulty in
her spiritual life and describes her prayer of that time as
unpleasant: "I don't know what heavy penance could have
come to mind that frequently I would not have gladly under­
taken rather than recollect myself in the practice of prayer. "5
These struggles for some kind of recollection lasted until she
was thirty-nine. Those years represent a time in which she was
unable to integrate her relationships with the world and with
God: "I was living an extremely burdensome life, because in
prayer I understood more clearly my faults. On the one hand
God was calling me; on the other hand I was following the
world. "6 At one point in her pain over the whole situation she
                                 2
                       INTRODUCTION

decided that the more humble thing to do would be to give up
the practice of prayer. Although she gave it up for only a short
time, she was forever lamenting that mistaken humility. She
regarded this error as the worst of her life and recognized that
it could have had dire consequences. 7
     On two occasions in 1 5 54, the first by means of a statue
and then through a spiritual book, she experienced a new
conversion and the liberating power of Christ. At the sight of a
statue of her Lord in His sufferings she was stirred deeply, and
with many tears begged Him to strengthen her, at last coming
to put her trust fully in Him. In the other instance, she was
reading the Confessions of St. Augustine. When she read of how
Augustine heard the voice calling him in the garden, it seemed
that she was hearing the Lord from deep within calling her,
and Teresa felt a new strength.8 She was left renewed after
these experiences. From this time on, she says, a new life began
for her.
     In this new life the experience of passive quiet, and often
of union, became her habitual manner of prayer.9 This super­
natural prayer, as she calls it because of its passive character,
drew her further into a labyrinth of extraordinary experiences
difficult to understand and impossible for her to describe in a
satisfactory way to those from whom she sought guidance.
Since some of the spiritual directors she consulted refused to
suppose that such graces could be received by someone with
her weaknesses, they suspected the devil as the culprit. 10 Both
the hardship Teresa met with in trying to make herself under­
stood to her directors and confessors and their suspicions about
what she was trying to describe afflicted her gravely but result­
ed in her preliminary attempts to explain her spiritual state on
paper in what has become one of the classics of Christian
spirituality, The Book ofHer Life. This work was composed in its
first form in 1 562. As a result of her efforts to describe her
experiences and receive the proper guidance, a group of people
came to know Teresa and were fascinated by both her person­
ality and her writings. Among these were theologians and
teachers of spirituality, Dominicans, Jesuits, secular priests, lay
men and women, and even the bishop of Avila.
     After many extraordinary mystical experiences of rapture,
locutions, and intellectual and imaginative visions, Teresa re-
                                 3
                       INTRODUCTION