soul, as I later came to understand and will mention at the
end.8 For certainly I see secrets within ourselves that have
often caused me to marvel. And how many more there must be!
0 my Lord and my God, how great are Your grandeurs! We go
about here below like foolish little shepherds, for while it
seems that we are getting some knowledge of You it must
amount to no more than nothing; for even in our own selves
there are great secrets that we don't understand. I say "no more
than nothing" because I'm comparing it to the many, many
secrets that are in You, not because the grandeurs we see in
You are not extraordinary; and that includes those we can
attain knowledge of through Your works.
     6. To return to the verse, what I think is helpful in it for
explaining this matter is the idea of expansion. It seems that
since that heavenly water begins to rise from this spring I'm
mentioning that is deep within us, it swells and expands our
whole interior being producing ineffable blessings; nor does
the soul even understand what is given to it there. It perceives
a fragrance, let us say for now, as though there were in that
interior depth a brazier giving off sweet-smelling perfumes.
No light is seen, nor is the place seen where the brazier is; but
the warmth and the fragrant fumes spread through the entire
soul and even often enough, as I have said,9 the body shares in
them. See now that you understand me; no heat is felt, nor is
there the scent of any perfume, for the experience is more
delicate than an experience of these things; but I use the
examples only so as to explain it to you. And let persons who
have not experienced these things understand that truthfully
they do happen and are felt in this way, and the soul under­
stands them in a manner clearer than is my explanation right
now. This spiritual delight is not something that can be imag­
ined, because however diligent our efforts we cannot acquire it.
The very experience of it makes us realize that it is not of the
same metal as we ourselves but fashioned from the purest gold
of the divine wisdom. Here, in my opinion, the faculties are not
united but absorbed and looking as though in wonder at what
they see.
     7. It's possible that in dealing with these interior matters I
might contradict something of what I said elsewhere. That's no
surprise, because in the almost fifteen years10 since I wrote it
                                75
                     TERESA OF A VILA

the Lord may perhaps have given me clearer understanding in
these matters than I had before. Now, as then, I could be
completely mistaken-but I would not lie, because by God's
mercy I'd rather suffer a thousand deaths. I speak of what I
understand.
     8. It seems clear to me that the will must in some way be
united with God's will. But it is in the effects and deeds
following afterward that one discerns the true value of prayer;
there is no better crucible for testing prayer. It is quite a great
favor from our Lord if the person receiving the favor recog­
nizes it, and a very great one if he doesn't turn back.
     You will at once desire, my daughters, to obtain this
prayer; and you are right, for, as I have said, 1 1 the soul will
never understand the favors the Lord is granting there or the
love with which He is drawing it nearer to Himself. It is good
to try to understand how we can obtain such a favor; so I am
going to tell you what I have understood about this.
     9. Let's leave aside the times when our Lord is pleased to
grant it because He wants to and for no other reason. He
knows why; we don't have to meddle in this. After you have
done what should be done by those in the previous dwelling
places: humility! humility! By this means the Lord allows
Himself to be conquered with regard to anything we want
from Him. The first sign for seeing whether or not you have
humility is that you do not think you deserve these favors and
spiritual delights from the Lord or that you will receive them
in your lifetime.
     You will ask me how then one can obtain them without
seeking them. I answer that for the following reasons there is
no better way than the one I mentioned, of not striving for
them. First, because the initial thing necessary for such favors
is to love God without self-interest. Second, because there is a
slight lack of humility in thinking that for our miserable ser­
vices something so great can be obtained. Third, because the
authentic preparation for these favors on the part of those of us
who, after all, have offended Him is the desire to suffer and
imitate the Lord rather than to have spiritual delights. Fourth,
because His Majesty is not obliged to give them to us as He is
to give us glory if we keep His commandments. (Without these
favors we can be saved, and He knows better than we ourselves
                                76
                    THE INTERIOR CASTLE

what is fitting for us and who of us truly loves Him. This is
certain, I know. And I know persons who walk by the path of
love as they ought to walk, that is, only so as to serve their
Christ crucified; not only do these persons refuse to seek spiri­
tual delights from Him or to desire them but they beseech Him
not to give them these favors during their lifetime. This is
true.) The fifth reason is that we would be laboring in vain; for
since this water must not be drawn through aqueducts as was
the previous water, we are little helped by tiring ourselves if
the spring doesn't want to produce it. I mean that no matter
how much we meditate or how much we try to squeeze
something out and have tears, this water doesn't come in such a
way. It is given only to whom God wills to give it and often
when the soul is least thinking of it.
     1 0. We belong to Him, daughters. Let Him do whatever
He likes with us, bring us wherever He pleases. I really believe
that whoever humbles himself and is detached (I mean in fact
because the detachment and humility must not be j ust in our
thoughts-for they often deceive us-but complete) will re­
ceive the favor of this water from the Lord and many other
favors that we don't know how to desire. May He be forever
praised and blessed, amen.
                         CHAPTER THREE
     Deals with the prayer of recollection, which for the most part the
Lord gives before the prayer just mentioned. Tells about its effects and
about those that come from that spiritual delight, given by the Lord,
that was discussed in the previous chapter.
     1 . The effects of this prayer are many. I shall mention
some. But first, I want to mention another kind of prayer that
almost always begins before this one. Since I have spoken of
such a prayer elsewhere, 1 I shall say little. It is a recollection
that also seems to me to be supernatural because it doesn't
involve being in the dark or closing the eyes, nor does it consist
in any exterior thing, since without first wanting to do so, one
does close one's eyes and desire solitude. It seems that without
any contrivance the edifice is being built, by means of this
recollection, for the prayer that was mentioned. The senses and
exterior things seem to be losing their hold because the soul is
recovering what it had lost.

                                   77
                      TERESA OF AVILA