are the ones who have these devout feelings, for these souls
work almost continually with the intellect, engaging in discur­
sive thought and meditation. And they do well because nothing
further has been given them, although they would be right if
they engaged for a while in making acts of love, praising God,
rejoicing in His goodness, that He is who He is, and in desiring
His honor and glory. These acts should be made insofar as
possible, for they are great awakeners of the will. Such souls
would be well advised when the Lord gives them these acts not
to abandon them so as to finish the usual meditation.
   ·  7. Because I have spoken at length on this subject else­
where, 8 I will say nothing about it here. I only wish to inform
you that in order to profit by this path and ascend to the
dwelling places we desire, the important thing is not to think
much but to love much;9 and so do that which best stirs you to
love. Perhaps we don't know what love is. I wouldn't be very
much surprised, because it doesn't consist in great delight but
in desiring with strong determination to please God in every­
thing, in striving, insofar as possible, not to offend Him, and in
asking Him for the advancement of the honor and glory of His
Son and the increase of the Catholic Church. These are the
signs of love. Don't think the matter lies in thinking of nothing
else, and that if you become a little distracted all is lost.
      8. I have been very afflicted at times in the midst of this
turmoil of mind. A little more than four years ago I came to
understand through experience that the mind (or imagination,
to put it more clearly) is not the intellect. I asked a learned man
and he told me that this was so; which brought me no small
consolation. 10 For since the intellect is one of the soul's facul­
ties, it was an arduous thing for me that it should be so restless
at times. Ordinarily the mind flies about quickly, for only God
can hold it fast in such a way as to make it seem that we are
somehow loosed from this body. I have seen, I think, that the
faculties of my soul were occupied and recollected in God
while my mind on the other hand was distracted. This distrac­
tion puzzled me. l l
      9. 0 Lord, take into account the many things we suffer on
this path for lack of knowledge! The trouble is that since we do
not think there is anything to know other than that we must
think of You, we do not even know how to ask those who know
nor do we understand what there is to ask. Terrible trials are
                                70
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

suffered because we don't understand ourselves, and that
which isn't bad at all but good we think is a serious fault. This
lack of knowledge causes the afflictions of many people who
engage in prayer: complaints about interior trials, at least to a
great extent, by people who have no learning; melancholy and
loss of health; and even the complete abandonment of prayer.
For such persons don't reflect that there is an interior world
here within us. Just as we cannot stop the movement of the
heavens, but they proceed in rapid motion, so neither can we
stop our mind; and then the faculties of the soul go with it, and
we think we are lost and have wasted the time spent before
God. But the soul is perhaps completely joined with Him in
the dwelling places very close to the center while the mind is
on the outskirts of the castle suffering from a thousand wild
and poisonous beasts, and meriting by this suffering. As a
result we should not be disturbed; nor should we abandon
prayer, which is what the devil wants us to do. For the most
part all the trials and disturbances come from our not under­
standing ourselves.
     1 0. While writing this, I'm thinking about what's going on
in my head with the great noise there that I mentioned in the
beginning. 12 It makes it almost impossible for me to write what
I was ordered to. It seems as if there are in my head many
rushing rivers and that these waters are hurtling downward,
and that there are many little birds and whistling sounds, not
in the ears but in the upper part of the head where, they say,
the higher part of the soul is. And I was in that superior part
for a long time for it seems this powerful movement of the
spirit is a swift upward one. Please God I'll remember to
mention the cause of this in discussing the dwelling places that
come further on, for this is not a fitting place to do so, and I
wouldn't be surprised if the Lord gave me this headache so that
I could understand these things better. For all this turmoil in
my head doesn't hinder prayer or what I am saying, but the
soul is completely taken up in its quiet, love, desires, and clear
knowledge.
     1 1 . Now then if the superior part of the soul is in the
superior part of the head, why isn't the soul disturbed? This I
don't know. But I do know that what I say is true. The pain is
felt when suspension does not accompany the prayer. When
suspension does accompany prayer, no pain is felt until the
                                71
                      TERESA OF AVILA