shown another light so different from earth's light that if he
were to spend his whole life trying to imagine that light, along
with the other things, he would be unable to do so. It happens
that within an instant so many things together are taught him
that if he were to work for many years with his imagination
and mind in order to systematize them he wouldn't be able to
do so, not with even one thousandth part of one of them. This
is not an intellectual but an imaginative vision, for the eyes of
the soul see much better than do bodily eyes here on earth, and
without words understanding of some things is given; I mean
that if a person sees some saints, he knows them as well as if he
had often spoken with them.
      8. At other times, along with the things seen through the
eyes of the soul by an intellectual vision, other things are
represented, especially a multitude of angels with their Lord.
And without seeing anything with the eyes of the body or the
soul, through an admirable knowledge I will not be able to
explain, there is represented what I'm saying and many other
things not meant to be spoken of. Anyone who experiences
them, and has more ability than I, will perhaps know how to
explain them, although doing so seems to me very difficult
indeed. Whether all this takes place in the body or not, I
wouldn't know; at least I wouldn't swear that the soul is in the
body or that the body is without the soul. 1 1
      9. I have often thought that just as the sun while i n the sky
has such strong rays that, even though it doesn't move from
there, the rays promptly reach the earth, so the soul and the
spirit, which are one, 12 could be like the sun and its rays. Thus,
while the soul remains in its place, the superior part rises above
it. In a word, I don't know what I'm saying. What is true is that
with the speed of a ball shot from an arquebus, when fire is
applied, an interior flight is experienced-! don't know what
else to call it-which, though noiseless, is so clearly a move­
ment that it cannot be the work of the imagination. And while
the spirit is far outside itself, from all it can understand, great
things are shown to it. When it again senses that it is within
itself, the benefits it feels are remarkable, and it has so little
esteem for all earthly things in comparison to the things it has
seen that the former seem like dung. From then on its life on
earth is very painful, and it doesn't see anything good in those
things that used to seem good to it. The experience causes it to
                                 136
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

care little about them. It seems that the Lord, like those Israel­
ites who brought back signs from the promised land,13 has
desired to show it something about its future land so that it
may suffer the trials of this laborious path, knowing where it
must go to get its final rest. Even though something that passes
so quickly will not seem to you very beneficial, the blessings
left in the soul are so great that only the person who has this
experience will be able to understand its value.
      10. Wherefore, the experience, obviously, is not from the
devil; it would be impossible for the imagination or the devil to
represent things that leave so much virtue, peace, calm, and
improvement in the soul. Three things, especially, are left in it
to a very sublime degree: knowledge of the grandeur of God,
because the more we see of this grandeur the greater is our
understanding; self-knowledge and humility on seeing that
something so low in comparison with the Creator of so many
grandeurs dared to offend Him (and neither does the soul dare
look up at Him); the third, little esteem of earthly things save
for those that can be used for the service of so great a God.
      1 1 . These are the jewels the Spouse begins to give the
betrothed, and their value is such that the soul will not want to
lose them. For these meetings14 remain so engraved in the
memory that I believe it's impossible to forget them until one
enjoys them forever, unless they are forgotten through one's
own most serious fault. But the Spouse who gives them has the
power to give the grace not to lose them.
      1 2 . Well to get back to the courage that is necessary, l5 does
it seem to you that this is so trivial a thing? For it truly seems
that because the soul loses its senses, and doesn't understand
why, it is separated from the body. It's necessary that He who
gives everything else give the courage also. You will say that
this fear is well paid. So do I. May it please His Majesty to give
us the courage so that we may merit to serve Him, amen.

                            CHAPTER SIX
      Tells about an efftct of the prayer discussed in the previous
chapter. How to understand whether this effect is true rather than
deceptive. Discusses anotherfavor the Lord grants so that the soul might
be occupied in praising Him.
      1 . As a result of these wonderful favors the soul is left so
                                  137
                      TERESA OF AVILA