to so desire. For humility, like the bee making honey in the bee­
hive, is always at work. Without it, everything goes wrong. But
let's remember that the bee doesn't fail to leave the beehive and
fly about gathering nectar from the flowers. So it is with the
soul in the room of self-knowledge; let it believe me and fly
sometimes to ponder the grandeur and majesty of its God.
Here it will discover its lowliness better than by thinking of it­
self, and be freer from the vermin that enter the first rooms,
those of self-knowledge. For even though, as I say, it is by the
mercy of God that a person practices self-knowledge, that
which applies to what is less applies so much more to what is
greater, as they say. And believe me, we shall practice much
better virtue through God's help than by being tied down to
our own misery.
      9. I don't know if this has been explained well. Knowing
ourselves is something so important that I wouldn't want any
relaxation ever in this regard, however high you may have
climbed into the heavens. While we are on this earth nothing is
more important to us than humility. So I repeat that it is good,
indeed very good, to try to enter first into the room where self­
knowledge is dealt with rather than fly off to other rooms. This
is the right road, and if we can journey along a safe and level
path, why should we want wings to fly? Rather, let's strive to
make more progress in self-knowledge, for in my opinion we
shall never completely know ourselves if we don't strive to
know God. By gazing at His grandeur, we get in touch with
our own lowliness; by looking at His purity, we shall see our
own filth; by pondering His humility, we shall see how far we
are from being humble.
      10. Two advantages come from such activity. First, it's
clear that something white seems much whiter when next to
something black, and vice versa with the black next to the
white. The second is that our intellects and wills, dealing in
turn now with self, now with God, become nobler and better
prepared for every good. And it would be disadvantageous for
us never to get out of the mire of our miseries. As we said of
those who are in mortal sin, that their streams are black and
foul smelling, so it is here; although not entirely-God deliver
us-for we are just making a comparison. If we are always
fixed on our earthly misery, the stream will never flow free
                                43
                      TERESA OF AVILA

from the mud of fears, faintheartedness, and cowardice. I
would be looking to see if I'm being watched or not; if by
taking this path things will turn out badly for me; whether it
might be pride to dare begin a certain work; whether it would
be good for a person so miserable to engage in something so
lofty as prayer; whether I might be judged better than others if
I don't follow the path they all do. I'd be thinking that ex­
tremes are not good, even in the practice of virtue; that, since I
am such a sinner, I might have a greater fall; that perhaps I
would not advance and would do harm to good people; that
someone like myself has no need of special things.
      1 1 . Oh, God help me, daughters, how many souls must
have been made to suffer great loss in this way by the devil!
These souls think that all such fears stem from humility. And
there are other things I could mention. The fears come from
not understanding ourselves completely. They distort self­
knowledge; and I'm not surprised if we never get free from
ourselves, for this lack of freedom from ourselves, and even
more, is what can be feared. So I say, daughters, that we should
set our eyes on Christ, our Good, and on His saints. There we
shall learn true humility, the intellect will be enhanced, as I
have said, 1 1 and self-knowledge will not make one base and
cowardly. Even though this is the first dwelling place, it is very
rich and so precious that if the soul slips away from the vermin
within it, nothing will be left to do but advance. Terrible are
the wiles and deceits used by the devil so that souls may not
know themselves or understand their own paths.
      1 2 . I could give some very good proofs from experience of
the wiles the devil uses in these first dwelling places. Thus I
say that you should think not in terms of just a few rooms but
in terms of a million; 12 for souls, all with good intentions, enter
here in many ways. But since the devil always has such a bad
intention, he must have in each room many legions of devils to
fight souls off when they try to go from one room to the other.
Since the poor soul doesn't know this, the devil plays tricks on
it in a thousand ways. He's not so successful with those who
have advanced closer to where the King dwells. But since in the
first rooms souls are still absorbed in the world and engulfed in
their pleasures and vanities, with their honors and pretenses,
their vassals (which are these senses and faculties) don't have
                                 44
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE