the strength God gave human nature in the beginning. And
these souls are easily conquered, even though they may go
about with desires not to offend God and though they do
perform good works. Those who see themselves in this state
must approach His Majesty as often as possible. They must
take His Blessed Mother and His saints as intercessors so that
these intercessors may fight for them, for the soul's vassals have
little strength to defend themselves. Truly, in all states it's
necessary that strength come to us from God. May His Majesty
through His mercy give it to us, amen.
      1 3 . How miserable the life in which we live! Because
elsewhere I have said a great deal about the harm done to us by
our failure to understand well this humility and self-knowl­
edge, 13 I'll tell you no more about it here, even though this self­
knowledge is the most important thing for us. Please God, I
may have now said something beneficial for you.
      14. You must note that hardly any of the light coming
from the King's royal chamber reaches these first dwelling
places. Even though they are not dark and black, as when the
soul is in sin, they nevertheless are in some way darkened so
that the soul cannot see the light. The darkness is not caused by
a flaw in the room-for I don't know how to explain myself­
but by so many bad things like snakes and vipers and poisonous
creatures that enter with the soul and don't allow it to be aware
of the light. It's as if a person were to enter a place where the
sun is shining but be hardly able to open his eyes because of the
mud in them. The room is bright but he doesn't enjoy it
because of the impediment of things like these wild animals or
beasts that make him close his eyes to everything but them. So,
I think, must be the condition of the soul. Even though it may
not be in a bad state, it is so involved in worldly things and so
absorbed with its possessions, honor, or business affairs, as I
have said, 14 that even though as a matter of fact it would want
to see and enjoy its beauty these things do not allow it to; nor
does it seem that it can slip free from so many impediments. If
a person is to enter the second dwelling places, it is important
that he strive to give up unnecessary things and business affairs.
Each one should do this in conformity with his state in life. It is
something so appropriate in order for him to reach the main
dwelling place that if he doesn't begin doing this I hold that it
                                 45
                      TERESA OF AVILA

will be impossible for him to get there. And it will even be
impossible for him to stay where he is without danger even
though he has entered the castle, for in the midst of such
poisonous creatures one cannot help but be bitten at one time
or another.
      1 5. Now then, what would happen, daughters, if we who
are already free from these snares, as we are, and have entered
much further into the castle to other secret dwelling places
should turn back through our own fault and go out to this
tumult? There are, because of our sins, many persons to whom
God has granted favors who through their own fault have
fallen back into this misery. In the monastery we are free with
respect to exterior matters; in interior matters may it please the
Lord that we also be free, and may He free us. Guard your­
selves, my daughters, from extraneous cares. Remember that
there are few dwelling places in this castle in which the devils
do not wage battle. True, in some rooms the guards (which I
believe I have said are the faculties)15 have the strength to fight;
but it is very necessary that we don't grow careless in recogniz­
ing the wiles of the devil, and that we not be deceived by his
changing himself into an angel of light. 16 There's a host of
things he can do to cause us harm; he enters little by little, and
until he's done the harm we don't recognize him.
      1 6. I've already told you elsewhere17 that he's like a noise­
less file, that we need to recognize him at the outset. Let me say
something that will explain this better for you.
     He gives a Sister various impulses toward penance, for it
seems to her she has no rest except when she is tormenting
herself. This may be a good beginning; but if the prioress has
ordered that no penance be done without permission, and the
devil makes the Sister think that in a practice that's so good one
can be rightly daring, and she secretly gives herself up to such
a penitential life that she loses her health and doesn't even
observe what the rule commands, you can see clearly where all
this good will end up.
       He imbues another with a very great zeal for perfection.
 Such zeal is in itself good. But it could follow that every little
 fault the Sisters commit will seem to her a serious breach; and
 she is careful to observe whether they commit them, and then
 informs the prioress. It could even happen at times that she
                                46
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

doesn't see her own faults because of her intense zeal for the
religious observance. Since the other Sisters don't understand
what's going on within her and see all this concern, they might
not accept her zeal so well.
     1 7. What the devil is hereby aiming after is no small thing:
the cooling of the charity and love the Sisters have for one
another. This would cause serious harm. Let us understand,
my daughters, that true perfection consists in love of God and
neighbor; the more perfectly we keep these two command­
ments, the more perfect we will be. All that is in our rule and
constitutions serves for nothing else than to be a means toward
keeping these commandments with greater perfection. Let's
forget about indiscreet zeal; it can do us a lot of harm. Let each
one look to herself. Because I have said enough about this
elsewhere, 1 8 I'll not enlarge on the matter.
     1 8 . This mutual love is so important that I would never
want it to be forgotten. The soul could lose its peace and even
disturb the peace of others by going about looking at trifling
things in people that at times are not even imperfections, but
since we know little we see these things in the wt>rst light; look
how costly this kind of perfection would be. Likewise, the devil
could tempt the prioress in this way; and such a thing would be
more dangerous. As a result much discretion is necessary. If
things are done against the rule and constitutions, the matter
need not always be seen in a good light. The prioress should be
cautioned, and if she doesn't amend, the superior informed.
This is charity. And the same with the Sisters if there is
something serious. And to fail to do these things for fear of a
temptation would itself be a temptation. But it should be
carefully noted-so that the devil doesn't deceive us-that we
must not talk about these things to one another. The devil
could thereby gain greatly and manage to get the custom of
gossiping started. The matter should be discussed with the one
who will benefit, as I have said. In this house, glory to God,
there's not much occasion for gossip since such continual si­
lence is kept; but it is good that we be on guard.




                                47
    THE SECOND DWELLING PLACES


           THIS SECTION HAS ONLY ONE CHAPTER