its activity is directed to this praise. Oh, how many festivals
and demonstrations the soul would organize, if it could, that all
might know its joy! It seems it has found itself and that, like the
father of the prodigal son, it would want to prepare a festival
and invite all5 because it sees itself in an undoubtedly safe
place, at least for the time being. And I hold that there is reason
for its desires. The devil cannot give this experience, because
there is so much interior joy in the very intimate part of the
soul and so much peace; and all the happiness stirs the soul to
the praises of God.
      1 1 . To be silent and conceal this great impulse of happi­
ness, when experiencing it, is no small pain. Saint Francis must
have felt this impulse when the robbers struck him, for he ran
through the fields crying out and telling them that he was the
herald of the great King; and also other saints must feel it who
go to deserts to be able to proclaim as Saint Francis these
praises of their God. I knew a saint named Friar Peter of
Alcantara-for I believe from the way he lived that he was
one-who did this very thing,6 and those who at one time
listened to him thought he was crazy. Oh, what blessed mad­
ness, Sisters! If only God would give it to us all! And what a
favor He has granted you by bringing you to this house where,
when the Lord gives you this favor and you tell others about it,
you will receive help rather than the criticism you would
receive in the world. This proclamation is so unusual there that
one. is not at all surprised at the criticism.
      1 2 . Oh, how unfortunate the times and miserable the life
in which we now live; happy are they whose good fortune it is
to remain apart from the world. Sometimes it is a particular joy
for me to see these Sisters gathered together and feeling such
great joy at being in the monastery that they praise our Lord as
much as possible. It is seen very clearly that their praises rise
from the interior of the soul. I would want you to praise Him
often, Sisters; for the one who begins awakens the others. In
what better way can you, when together, use your tongues
than in the praises of God, since we have so many reasons for
praising Him?
      1 3 . May it please His Majesty to give us this prayer often
since it is so safe and beneficial; to acquire it is impossible
because it is something very supernatural. And it may last a
                                142
                    THE INTERIOR CASTLE

whole day. The soul goes about like a person who has drunk a
great deal but not so much as to be drawn out of his senses; or
like a person suffering melancholy who has not lost his reason
completely but cannot free himself from what is in his imagina­
tion-nor can anyone else.
     These are inelegant comparisons for something so pre­
cious, but I can't think up any others. The joy makes a person
so forgetful of self and of all things that he doesn't advert to,
nor can he speak of anything other than, the praises of God
that proceed from his joy.
     Let us all help this soul, my daughters. Why do we want to
have more discretion? What can give us greater happiness? And
may all creatures help us forever and ever, amen, amen, amen!

                          CHAPTER SEVEN
       Discusses the kind of suffering those souls to whom God grants the
favors mentioned feel concerning their sins. Tells what a great mistake
it is, however spiritual one may be, not to practice keeping the human­
ity of our Lord and Savior jesus Christ present in one s mind; also His
most sacred Passion and life, His glorious Mother, and the saints. The
chapter is very helpful.
       1 . You will think, Sisters, that these souls to whom the
Lord communicates Himself in this unusual way will already
be so sure of enjoying Him forever that they will have nothing
to fear nor sins to weep over. Those especially who have not
attained these favors from God will think this, for if they had
enjoyed them, they would know what I'm going to say. But to
think the above would be a great mistake because suffering
over one's sins increases the more one receives from our God.
And, for my part, I hold that until we are there where nothing
can cause pain this suffering will not be taken away.
       2. True, sometimes there is greater affliction than at other
times; and the affliction is also of a different kind; for the soul
doesn't think about the suffering it will undergo on account of
its sins but of how ungrateful it has been to One to whom it
owes so much and who deserves so much to be served. For in
these grandeurs God communicates to it, it understands much
more about Him. It is astonished at how bold it was; it weeps
over its lack of respect; it thinks its foolishness was so excessive
                                   143
                     TERESA OF AVILA

that it never finishes grieving over that foolishness when it
recalls that for such base things it abandoned so great a Majes­
ty. Much more does it recall this foolishness than it does the
favors it receives, though these favors are as remarkable as the
ones mentioned or as those still to be spoken of. These favors
are like the waves of a large river in that they come and go; but
the memory these souls have of their sins clings like thick mire.
It always seems that these sins are alive in the memory, and this
is a heavy cross.
      3. I know a person1 who, apart from wanting to die in
order to see God, wanted to die so as not to feel the continual
pain of how ungrateful she had been to One to whom she ever
owed so much and would owe. Thus it didn't seem to her that
anyone's wickedness could equal her own, for she understood
that there could be no one else from whom God would have
had so much to put up with and to whom He had granted so
many favors. As for the fear of hell, such persons don't have
any. That they might lose God, at times-though seldom­
distresses them very much. All their fear is that God might
allow them out of His hand to offend Him, and they find
themselves in as miserable a state as they were once before. In
regard to their own suffering or glory, they don't care. If they
don't want to stay long in purgatory, the reason comes from
the fact of their not wanting to be away from God-as are
those who are in purgatory-rather than from the sufferings
undergone there.
     4. I wouldn't consider it safe for a soul, however favored
by God, to forget that at one time it saw itself in a miserable
state. Although recalling this misery is a painful thing, doing so
is helpful for many. Perhaps it is because I have been so
wretched that I have this opinion and am always mindful of
my misery. Those who have been good will not have to feel this
pain, although there will always be failures as long as we live in
this mortal body. No relief is afforded this suffering by the
thought that our Lord has already pardoned and forgotten the
sins. Rather, it adds to the suffering to see so much goodness
and realize that favors are granted to one who deserves nothing
but hell. I think such a realization was a great martyrdom for
Saint Peter and the Magdalene. Since their love for God had
grown so deep and they had received so many favors and come
                               144
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE