practice this discursive reflection. It could be that one can, for
God leads souls by many paths. But let not those who can
travel by the road of discursive thought condemn those who
cannot, or judge them incapable of enjoying the sublime bless­
ings that lie enclosed in the mysteries of our good, Jesus Christ.
Nor will anyone make me think, however spiritual he may be,
that he will advance by trying to turn away from these myster­
Ies.
     1 3 . There are some principles and even means that certain
souls use, by which it is thought that when a person begins to
experience the prayer of quiet and to relish the enjoyment and
spiritual delights given by the Lord, the important thing is to
remain always in that state of delight. Well, now, let them
believe me and not be so absorbed, as I have said elsewhere. 14
Life is long, and there are in it many trials, and we need to look
at Christ our model, how He suffered them, and also at His
apostles and saints, so as to bear these trials with perfection.
Jesus is too good a companion for us to turn away from Him
and His most blessed Mother, and He is very pleased that we
grieve over His sufferings even though we sometimes leave
aside our own consolation and delight. Moreover, daughters,
enjoyment in prayer is not so habitual that there is not time for
everything. I would be suspicious of anyone who says this
delight is continual; I mean, who can never do what was
mentioned. And you should be suspicious too, and strive to free
yourselves from this error and avoid such absorption with all
your strength. If your efforts aren't enough, tell the prioress so
that she might give you some task demanding such care that
this danger is removed. For if this absorption continues, it is
extremely dangerous, at least for the brain and the head.
     14. I believe I've explained that it is fitting for souls,
however spiritual, to take care not to flee from corporeal things
to the extent of thinking that even the most sacred humanity
causes harm. Some quote what the Lord said to His disciples
that it was fitting that He go.15 I can't bear this. I would wager
that He didn't say it to His most Blessed Mother, because she
was firm in the faith; she knew He was God and man, and even
though she loved Him more than they did, she did so with such
perfection that His presence was a help rather than a hin­
drance. The apostles must not have been as firm then in the
                               149
                        TERESA OF AVILA

faith as they were afterward and as we have reason to be now. I
tell you, daughters, that I consider this a dangerous path and
think the devil could make one lose devotion for the most
Blessed Sacrament.
      1 5. The mistake it seemed to me I was making wasn't so
extreme; rather it consisted of not delighting so much in the
thought of our Lord Jesus Christ but in going along in that
absorption, waiting for that enjoyment. And I realized clearly
that I was proceeding badly. Since it wasn't possible for me to
experience the absorption always, the mind wandered here and
there. My soul, it seems to me, was like a bird flying about that
doesn't know where to light; and it was losing a lot of time and
not making progress in virtue or improving in prayer. I didn't
understand the reason, nor would I have understood it, in my
opinion, because it seemed to me that what I was doing was
very correct, until a person with whom I was discussing my
prayer, who was a servant of God, warned me. Afterward, I
saw clearly how wrong I had been, and I never stop regretting
that there had been a time in which I failed to understand that
I could not gain much through such a great loss. And even if I
could gain, I wouldn't want any good save that acquired
through Him from whom all blessings come to us. May He be
always praised, amen.

                          CHAPTER EIGHT
      Discusses how God communicates Himself to the soul through an
intellectual vision; gives some counsels. Tells about the effects such a
vision causes if it is genuine. Recommends secrecy concerning these
favors.
      1 . For you to see, Sisters, that what I have told you is true
and that the further a soul advances the more it is accompanied
by the good Jesus, we will do well to discuss how, when His
Majesty desires, we cannot do otherwise than walk always with
 Him. This is evident in the ways and modes by which His
Majesty communicates Himself to us and shows us the love He
bears us. He does this through some very wonderful appari­
tions and visions. That you might not be frightened if He
grants you some of these, I want briefly to mention something
about these visions-if the Lord be pleased that I succeed-so
                                   1 50
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

that we might praise Him very much even though He may not
grant them to us. We would praise Him because being so filled
with majesty and power He nonetheless desires to communi­
cate thus with a creature.
     2. It will happen while the soul is heedless of any thought
about such a favor being granted to it, and though it never had
a thought that it deserved this vision, that it will feel Jesus
Christ, our Lord, beside it. Yet, it doesn't see Him, neither
with the eyes of the body nor with those of the soul. This is
called an intellectual vision; I don't know why. I saw the
person1 to whom God granted this favor, along with other
favors I shall mention further on, quite worried in the begin­
ning because, since she didn't see anything, she couldn't under­
stand the nature of this vision. However, she knew so certainly
that it was Jesus Christ, our Lord, who showed Himself to her
in that way that she couldn't doubt; I mean she couldn't doubt
the vision was there. As to whether it was from God or not,
even though she carried with her great effects to show that it
was, she nonetheless was afraid. She had never heard of an
intellectual vision, nor had she thought there was such a kind.
But she understood very clearly that it was this same Lord who
often spoke to her in the way mentioned.2 For until He granted
her this favor I am referring to, she never knew who was
speaking to her, although she understood the words.
     3. I know that since she was afraid about this vision (for it
isn't like the imaginative one that passes quickly, but lasts
many days and sometimes even more than a year), she went
very worried to her confessor. He asked her how, since she
didn't see anything, she knew that it was our Lord-what kind
of face He had.3 She told him she didn't know, that she didn't
see any face, and that she couldn't say any more than what she
had said, that what she did know was that He was the one who
spoke to her and that the vision had not been fancied. And
although some persons put many fears in her, she was still
frequently unable to doubt, especially when the Lord said to
her: "Do not be afraid, it is I."4 These words had so much
power that from then on she could not doubt the vision, and
she was left very much strengthened and happy over such good
company. She saw clearly that the vision was a great help
toward walking with a habitual remembrance of God and a
                               151
                     TERESA OF AVILA