IMPEDIMENTS
      If from the viewpoint of her own more evolved experience
and understanding the command to undertake such a task
again seemed well advised, from the standpoint of her physical
sufferings and the external problems and trials that were being
heaped on her at this time the mere thought of writing a new
book was painful to her. The Prologue begins in complaint.
Not many things that obedience had asked of her-and obedi­
ence had asked many difficult things-were as difficult as the
chore of writing at this time yet another book. "I have been
experiencing now for three months," she wearily reports,
"such great noise and weakness in my head that I've found it a
hardship even to write concerning necessary business mat­
ters."48
      In addition to this miserable health, the year was a trouble­
some and discouraging one; what she had worked for zealously
over the previous fifteen years could now be suppressed by the
new authorities. Her work had become the center of a conflict
that raged between Madrid and Rome. The jurisdictional com­
plexities became so tangled and the misunderstandings, rival­
ries, and calumnies so much a part of everyday life that histori­
ans today find it difficult to judge objectively.49
                                16
                      INTRODUCTION

     In 1 576 Fr. Jeronimo Tostado arrived in Spain with the
faculties of visitator, reformer, and commissary general of the
Spanish provinces and with the responsibility of carrying out
the decrees of the order's chapter at Piacenza, which had di­
rected that the houses opened in Andalusia against the will of
the general be abandoned. The "contemplative," or "primi­
tive," fathers were forbidden to form a province or a congrega­
tion separate from the province of Castile. Mother Teresa was
not to leave her monastery. The unpleasant rumor was that
Tostado had come to quash Teresa's work, and his presence
was the cause of considerable disquiet. But the papal nuncio in
Spain, Nicolas Ormaneto, who favored Teresa and her founda­
tions, advised Tostado to postpone his visit to Andalusia (where
Gratian, under an assignment of the nuncio, was on a mission
of reform among the Carmelites there) and instead to pass on to
Portugal. In a letter dated September 7, 1 576, Teresa thus
wrote to Maria de San Jose: "But, as God has delivered us from
Tostado, I hope His Majesty will help us in everything. You
are not maligning him in describing how he has worked against
the discalced fathers and against me, for he has given clear
indications of having done so."
     In June 1 577 Ormaneto died, and without the nuncio's
favor Teresa's followers now felt lost. With the death of Or­
maneto, the mother foundress thought it would be better to
return to her monastery of Saint Joseph in Avila and to remain
there "as a kind of prisoner" in accordance with the order of
the general definitory. To make matters worse, Ormaneto's
successor, Felipe Sega, whose reference to Teresa as a "restless
gadabout" at least demonstrated a lack of firsthand informa­
tion, at once set out with his new authority to discard the plans
of reform sponsored by Ormaneto.
     About this time, as well, there appeared a scurrilous pam­
phlet denouncing Teresa and calumniating Gratian with a
number of crimes, some too foolish and lurid to be believed but
yet sufficient to arouse at least faint suspicions. In October
1 577 Teresa was once more elected prioress of the Incarnation;
she felt nothing but aversion toward taking up again such a
responsibility. When this election became known, Tostado un­
wittingly came to Teresa's rescue and gave orders to annul the
valid election. The nuns, persisting to vote for Teresa in a
                                17
                      INTRODUCTION

second election, were then duly excommunicated. Though hap­
py to be left in peace, Teresa protested the injustice: "Learned
men declare that they are not excommunicated at all and that
the friars are going against the Council in declaring anyone
elected prioress who has a minority of votes. . . . Everyone is
shocked to see something like this, so offensive to everyone."50
     It was while she was in the midst of all these unpleasant
and disturbing events that Teresa was engaged in writing her
sublime book on prayer. The work was begun, appropriately,
on the feast of the Holy Trinity, June 2, 1 577. Within little
more than a month, she had proceeded as far as the fifth
dwelling place. We may suppose this from the copy made in
Toledo and ending with chapter 2 of the fifth dwelling place
when Teresa departed for Avila in mid July. Already in chap­
ter 2 of the fourth dwelling place she had alluded to the
inconvenience of interruptions: "God help me with what I
have undertaken! I've already forgot what I was dealing with,
for business matters and poor health have forced me to set this
work aside just when I was at my best; and since I have a poor
memory everything will come out confused because I can't go
back to read it over." S l
     Nothing more was done on the work until the beginning
of November, as she asserts at the outset of chapter 4 of the
fifth dwelling place: "About five months have passed since I
began, and because my head is in no condition to read over
what I've written, everything will have to continue without
order, and perhaps some things will be said twice."52 She
completed the remaining large section, more than half the
work, by November 29, within less than a month. Thus the
actual time spent on this spiritual masterpiece was a mere two
months.

                         INSPIRATION
     Despite her trials and ill health, Teresa held firmly to her
belief that "obedience usually lessens the difficulty of things
that seem impossible."53 She prayed when beginning: "May
He, in whose mercy I trust and who has helped me in other
more difficult things so as to favor me, do this work for me. "54
Her prayer was heard. By the time she had reached the epi-
                               18
                      INTRODUCTION

Iogue, her mood was entirely changed: "Although when I
began writing this book I am sending you I did so with the
aversion I mentioned in the beginning, now that I am finished
I admit the work has brought me much happiness, and I
consider the labor, though I confess it was small, well spent."55
     At times she seemed to feel special inspiration, and that a
work of such brilliance was brought to a conclusion so quickly
is itself extraordinary. In one instance she wrote: "If what I
have said up to now about this prayer is worthwhile, I know
clearly that I'm not the one who has said it."56 When she turns
to the topic of mystical prayer she prays: "In order to speak of
the fourth dwelling places I really need to entrust myself, as
I've already done, to the Holy Spirit and beg Him to speak for
me from here on that I may say something about the remaining
rooms in a way that you will understand."57 Among those who
actually saw Teresa writing this book was Maria del Naci­
miento, who gave the following testimony: "When the said
Mother Teresa of Jesus wrote the book called The Dwelling
Places, she was in Toledo, and this witness saw that it was after
Communion that she wrote this book, and when she wrote she
did so very rapidly and with such great beauty in her counten­
ance that this witness was in admiration, and she was so
absorbed in what she was writing that even if some noise was
made there, it did not hinder her; wherefore this witness
understood that in all that which she wrote and during the
time she was writing she was in prayer."58