that the soul that has so often, so earnestly, and with such
complete willingness offered everything to Him should under­
stand that in itself it no longer has any part to play; and it is
carried off with a noticeably more impetuous movement. It is
determined now to do no more than what the straw does when
drawn by the amber-if you have noticed-and abandon itself
into the hands of the One who is all powerful, for it sees that
the safest thing to do is to make a virtue of necessity. And that I
mentioned a straw is certainly appropriate, for as easily as a
huge giant snatches up a straw, this great and powerful Giant
of ours carries away the spirit.5
     3. It seems that the trough of water we mentioned (I
believe it was in the fourth dwelling place, for I don't recall
exactly)6 filled so easily and gently, I mean without any move­
ment. Here this great God, who holds back the springs of water
and doesn't allow the sea to go beyond its boundaries, 7 lets
loose the springs from which the water in this trough flows.
With a powerful impulse, a huge wave rises up so forcefully
that it lifts high this little bark that is our soul. A bark cannot
prevent the furious waves from leaving it where they will; nor
does the pilot have the power, nor do those who take part in
controlling the little ship. So much less can the interior part of
the soul stay where it will, or make its senses or faculties do
other than what they are commanded; here the soul doesn't
care what happens outwardly.
     4. It is certain, Sisters, that just from writing about it I am
amazed at how the immense power of this great King and
Emperor is shown here. What will be the amazement of the
one who experiences it! I hold that if His Majesty were to
reveal this power to those who go astray in the world as He
does to these souls, the former would not dare offend Him; this
out of fear if not out of love. Oh, how obliged, then, will those
persons be who have been informed through so sublime a path
to strive with all their might not to displease this Lord! For
love of Him, Sisters, I beg you, those of you to whom His
Majesty has granted these favors, or others like them, that you
don't grow careless, doing nothing but receive. Reflect that the
one who owes a lot must pay a lot.8
     5. In this respect, too, great courage is necessary, for this
favor is something frightening. If our Lord were not to give
                                1 34
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

such courage, the soul would always go about deeply dis­
tressed. For it reflects on what His Majesty does for it and
turns back to look at itself, at how little it serves in comparison
with its obligation, and at how the tiny bit it does is full of
faults, failures, and weaknesses. So as not to recall how imper­
fectly it performs some work-if it does-it prefers striving to
forget its works, keeping in mind its sins, and placing itself
before the mercy of God. Since it doesn't have anything with
which to pay, it begs for the pity and mercy God has always
had toward sinners.
      6. Perhaps He will respond as He did to a person who
before a crucifix was reflecting with deep affliction that she
had never had anything to give to God, or anything to give up
for Him. The Crucified Himself in consoling her told her He
had given her all the sufferings and trials He had undergone in
His Passion so that she could have them as her own to offer His
Father.9 The comfort and enrichment was such that, according
to what I have heard from her, she cannot forget the experi­
ence. Rather, every time she sees how miserable she is, she gets
encouragement and consolation from remembering those
words.
      I could mention here some other experiences like this, for
since I have dealt with so many holy and prayerful persons, I
know about many such experiences; but I want to limit myself
lest you think I am speaking of myself. What I said seems to me
very beneficial to help you understand how pleased our Lord is
that we know ourselves and strive to reflect again and again on
our poverty and misery and on how we possess nothing that we
have not received. So, my Sisters, courage is necessary for this
knowledge and for the many other graces given to the soul the
Lord has brought to this stage. And when there is humility,
courage, in my opinion, is even more necessary for this knowl­
edge of one's own misery. May the Lord give us this humility
because of who He is.
      7. Well, now, to return to this quick rapture of the spirit. 10
It is such that the spirit truly seems to go forth from the body.
On the other hand, it is clear that this person' is not dead; at
least, he cannot say whether for some moments he was in the
body or not. It seems to him that he was entirely in another
region different from this in which we live, where there is
                                 135
                      TERESA OF AVILA