always sustaining the soul there flow streams of milk bringing
comfort to all the people of the castle. It seems the Lord desires
that in some manner these others in the castle may enjoy the
great deal the soul is enjoying and that from that full-flowing
river, where this tiny fount is swallowed up, a spurt of that
water will sometimes be directed toward the sustenance of
those who in corporeal things must serve these two who are
wed. Just as a distracted person would feel this water if he were
suddenly bathed in it, and would be unable to avoid feeling it,
so are these operations recognized, and even with greater certi­
tude. For just as a great gush of water could not reach us if it
didn't have a source, as I have said, so it is understood clearly
that there is Someone in the interior depths who shoots these
arrows and gives life to this life, and that there is a Sun in the
interior of the soul from which a brilliant light proceeds and is
sent to the faculties. The soul, as I have said, 12 does not move
from that center nor is its peace lost; for the very One who
gave peace to the apostles when they were together13 can give
it to the soul.
      7. It has occurred to me that this greeting of the Lord
must have amounted to much more than is apparent from its
sound, as well as our Lord's words to the glorious Magdalene
that she go in peace. 14 Since the Lord's words are effected in us
as deeds, they must have worked in those souls already dis­
posed in such a manner that everything corporeal in them was
taken away and they were left in pure spirit. Thus the soul
could be joined in this heavenly union with the uncreated
spirit. For it is very certain that in emptying ourselves of all
that is creature and detaching ourselves from it for the love of
God, the same Lord will fill us with Himself. And thus, while
Jesus our Lord was once praying for His apostles-! don't
remember where-He said that they were one with the Father
and with Him, just as Jesus Christ our Lord is in the Father
and the Father is in Him. 15 I don't know what greater love
there can be than this. And all of us are included here, for His
Majesty said: I ask not only for them but for all those who also will
believe in me; and He says: I am in them.16
      8. 0 God help me, how true these words are! And how
well they are understood by the soul who is in this prayer and


                                 180
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

sees for itself. How well we would all understand them if it
were not for our own fault, since the words of Jesus Christ, our
King and Lord, cannot fail. l7 But since we fail by not disposing
ourselves and turning away from all that can hinder this light,
we do not see ourselves in this mirror that we contemplate,
where our image is engraved.
     9. Well, to return to what we were saying. 1 8 The Lord
puts the soul in this dwelling of His, which is the center of the
soul itself. They say that the empyreal heaven where the Lord
is does not move as do the other heavens; similarly, it seems, in
the soul that enters here there are none of those movements
that usually take place in the faculties and the imagination and
do harm to the soul, nor do these stirrings take away its peace.
      It seems I'm saying that when the soul reaches this state in
which God grants it this favor, it is sure of its salvation and safe
from falling again. I do not say such a thing, and wherever I so
speak that it seems the soul is secure, this should be taken to
mean as long as the divine Majesty keeps it in His hand and it
does not offend Him. At least I know certainly that the soul
doesn't consider itself safe even though it sees itself in this state
and the state has lasted for some years. But it goes about with
much greater fear than before, guarding itself from any small
offense against God and with the strongest desire to serve Him,
as will be said further on, 19 and with habitual pain and confu­
sion at seeing the little it can do and the great deal to which it is
obliged. This pain is no small cross but a very great penance.
 For when this soul does penance, the delight will be greater in
the measure that the penance is greater. The true penance
comes when God takes away the soul's health and strength for
doing penance. Even though I have mentioned elsewhere20 the
great pain this lack causes, the pain is much more intense here.
All these things must come to the soul from its roots, from
where it is planted. The tree that is beside the running water is
fresher and gives more fruit. What is there, then, to marvel at
 in the desires this soul has since its true spirit has become one
with the heavenly water we mentioned?2 1
      1 0. Now then, to return to what I was saying,22 it should
not be thought that the faculties, senses, and passions are
always in this peace; the soul is, yes. But in those other dwell-


                                 181
                         TERESA OF AVILA

ing places, times of war, trial, and fatigue are never lacking;
however, they are such that they do not take the soul from its
place and its peace; that is, as a rule.
     This center of our soul, or this spirit, is something so
difficult to explain, and even believe in, that I think, Sisters, I'll
not give you the temptation to disbelieve what I say, for I do
not know how to explain this center. That there are trials and
sufferings and that at the same time the soul is in peace is a
difficult thing to explain. I want to make one or more compari­
sons for you. Please God, I may be saying something through
them; but if not, I know that I'm speaking the truth in what I
say.
     1 1 . The King is in His palace and there are many wars in
his kingdom and many painful things going on, but not on that
account does he fail to be at his post. So here, even though in
those other dwelling places there is much tumult and there are
many poisonous creatures and the noise is heard, no one enters
that center dwelling place and makes the soul leave. Nor do the
things the soul hears make it leave; even though they cause it
some pain, the suffering is not such as to disturb it and take
away its peace. The passions are now conquered and have a
fear of entering the center because they would go away from
there more subdued.
     Our entire body may ache; but if the head is sound, the
head will not ache just because the body aches.
     I am laughing to myself over these comparisons for they
do not satisfy me, but I don't know any others. You may think
what you want; what I have said is true.


                          CHAPTER THREE
     Deals with the wonderful effects of this prayer that was men­
tioned. It is necessary to pay attention and heed to these effects, for the
difference between them and the previous ones is remarkable.
      1 . Now, then, we are saying that this little butterfly has
already died, with supreme happiness for having found repose
and that Christ lives in it. Let us see what life it lives, or how
this life differs from the life it was living. For from the effects,
we shall see if what was said is true. By what I understand
these effects are the following. 1
                                    182
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE