full of longings to enjoy completely the One who grants them
that it lives in a great though delightful torment. With the
strongest yearnings to die, and thus usually with tears, it begs
God to take it from this exile. Everything it sees wearies it.
When it is alone it finds some relief, but soon this torment
returns; yet when the soul does not experience this pain, some­
thing is felt to be missing. In sum, this little butterfly is unable
to find a lasting place of rest; rather, since the soul goes about
with such tender love, any occasion that enkindles this fire
more makes the soul fly aloft. As a result, in this dwelling place
the raptures are very common and there is no means to avoid
them even though they may take place in public. Hence, perse­
cutions and criticism. Even though the soul may want to be
free from fears, others do not allow this freedom. For there are
many persons who cause these fears, especially confessors.
     2. And even though on the one hand the soul seems to feel
very secure in its interior part, especially when it is alone with
God, on the other hand it goes about in deep distress because it
fears the devil may in some way beguile it into offending the
One whom it loves so much. Little does it suffer over criticism,
unless the confessor himself distresses it, as if it could do more.
It does nothing but ask prayers from all and beg His Majesty to
lead it by another path, for they all tell it to take another; they
say that the path it is on is very dangerous. But since the soul
has found this path to be so greatly beneficial, it sees that such
a path is leading it along the way to heaven, according to what
it reads, hears, and knows about God's commandments. Even if
it wanted to, it could not really desire anything else but to
abandon itself into God's hands. And even this powerlessness
distresses it, for it thinks it is not obeying its confessor. Obey­
ing and not offending our Lord, it thinks, is the complete
remedy against deception. Thus, in its opinion, it would not
commit knowingly a venial sin even were others to crush it to
pieces. It is intensely afflicted upon seeing that it cannot free
itself from unknowingly committing many venial sins.
      3. God gives these souls the strongest desire not to dis­
please Him in anything, however small, and the desire to avoid
if possible every imperfection. For this reason alone, if for no
other, the soul wants to flee people, and it has great envy of
those who have lived in deserts. On the other hand, it would
                                138
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

want to enter into the midst of the world to try to play a part in
getting even one soul to praise God more. A woman in this
stage of prayer is distressed by the natural hindrance there is to
her entering the world, and she has great envy of those who
have the freedom to cry out and spread the news abroad about
who this great God of hosts is.
     4. 0 poor little butterfly, bound with so many chains that
do not let you fly where you would like! Have pity on it, my
God! Ordain that it might somehow fulfill its desires for your
honor and glory. Do not be mindful of the little it deserves and
of its lowly nature. You have the power, Lord, to make the
great sea and the large river Jordan roll back and allow the
children of Israel to pass. 1 Yet, do not take pity on this little
butterfly! Helped by your strength, it can suffer many trials; it
is determined to do so and desires to suffer them. Extend Your
powerful arm,2 Lord, that this soul might not spend its life in
things so base. Let Your grandeur appear in a creature so
feminine and lowly, whatever the cost to her, so that the world
may know that this grandeur is not hers at all and may praise
You. This praise is what she desires, and she would give a
thousand lives-if she had that many-if one soul were to
praise You a little more through her; and she would consider
such lives very well spent. She understands in all truth that she
doesn't deserve to suffer for You a tiny trial, much less die.
     5. I don't know what my goal was in saying this, Sisters,
nor why I said it, for these words were not planned. Let us
realize that such effects are undoubtedly left by these suspen­
sions and ecstasies. The desires are not passing but remain, and
when an occasion arises to manifest their presence, one sees
that they are not feigned. Why do I say they remain? Some­
times the soul feels, and in the smallest things, that it is a
coward and so timid and frightened it doesn't think that it has
the courage to do anything. I understand that the Lord leaves it
then to its own human nature for its own greater good. It then
sees that if it had been able to do something, the power was
given by His Majesty. This truth is seen with a clarity that
leaves the soul annihilated within itself and with deeper knowl­
edge of God's mercy and grandeur-attributes the Lord de­
sired to show to something so low. But usually its state is like
that we've just mentioned.
                               1 39
                      TERESA OF AVILA