body. Everything is immediately condemned as from the devil
or melancholy. And the world is so full of this melancholy that
I am not surprised. There is so much of it now in the world,
and the devil causes so many evils through this means that
confessors are very right in fearing it and considering it care足
fully. But the poor soul that walks with the same fear and goes
to its confessor as to its judge, and is condemned by him,
cannot help but be deeply tormented and disturbed. Only the
one who has passed through this will understand what a great
torment it is. For this is another one of the terrible trials these
souls suffer, especially if they have lived wretched lives, think足
ing that because of their sins God will allow them to be
deceived. Even though they feel secure and cannot believe that
the favor, when granted by His Majesty, is from any other
spirit than from God, the torment returns immediately since
the favor is something that passes quickly, and the remem足
brance of sins is always present, and the soul sees faults in
itself, which are never lacking. When the confessor assures it,
the soul grows calm, although the disturbance will return. But
when the confessor contributes to the torment with more fear,
this trial becomes something almost unbearable-especially
when some dryness comes between the times of these favors. It
then seems to the soul that it has never been mindful of God
and never will be; and when it hears His Majesty spoken of, it
seems to it as though it were hearing about a person far away.
     9. All this would amount to nothing if it were not for the
fact that in addition comes the feeling that it is incapable of
explaining things to its confessors, that it has deceived them.
And even though it thinks and sees that it tells its confessors
about every stirring, even the first ones, this doesn't help. The
soul's understanding is so darkened that it becomes incapable
of seeing the truth and believes whatever the imagination
represents to it (for the imagination is then its master) or
whatever foolish things the devil wants to represent. The Lord,
it seems, gives the devil license so that the soul might be tried
and even be made to think it is rejected by God. Many are the
things that war against it with an interior oppression so keen
and unbearable that I don't know what to compare this experi足
ence to if not to the oppression of those that suffer in hell, for
no consolation is allowed in the midst of this tempest. If they
                                112
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

desire to be consoled by their confessor, it seems the devils
assist him to torment it more. Thus, when a confessor was
dealing with a person after she had suffered this torment (for
it seems a dangerous affliction since there are so many things
involved in it), he told her to let him know when she was in
this state; but the torment was always so bad that he came to
realize there was nothing he could do about it.6 Well then, if a
person in this state who knows how to read well takes up a
book in the vernacular, he will find that he understands no
more of it than if he didn't know how to read even one of the
letters, for the intellect is incapable of understanding. 7
      1 0. In sum, there is no remedy in this tempest but to wait
for the mercy of God. For at an unexpected time, with one
word alone or a chance happening, He so quickly calms the
storm that it seems there had not been even as much as a cloud
in that soul, and it remains filled with sunlight and much more
consolation. And like one who has escaped from a dangerous
battle and been victorious, it comes out praising our Lord; for
it was He who fought for the victory. It knows very clearly
that it did not fight, for all the weapons with which it could
have defended itself are seen to be, it seems, in the hands of its
enemies. Thus, it knows clearly its wretchedness and the very
little we of ourselves can do if the Lord abandons us.
      1 1 . It seems the soul has no longer any need of reflection
to understand this, for the experience of having suffered
through it, having seen itself totally incapacitated, made it
understand our nothingness and what miserable things we are.
For in this state grace is so hidden (even though the soul must
not be without grace since with all this torment it doesn't
offend God nor would it offend Him for anything on earth)
that not even a very tiny spark is visible. The soul doesn't think
that it has any love of God or that it ever had any, for if it has
done some good, or His Majesty has granted it some favor, all
of this seems to have been dreamed up or fancied. As for sins, it
sees certainly that it has committed them.
      1 2 . 0 Jesus, and what a thing it is to see this kind of
forsaken soul; and, as I have said, 8 what little help any earthly
consolation is for it! Hence, do not think, Sisters, if at some
time you find yourselves in this state, that the rich and those
who are free will have a better remedy for these times of
                               113
                     TERESA OF AVILA