to know the grandeur and majesty of God, the remembrance of
their misery would have been difficult to suffer, and they
would have suffered it with tender sentiments.
     5. It will also seem to you that anyone who enjoys such
lofty things will no longer meditate on the mysteries of the
most sacred humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Such a person
would now be engaged entirely in loving. This is a matter I
wrote about at length elsewhere.2 They have contradicted me
about it and said that I don't understand, because these are
paths along which our Lord leads, and that when souls have
already passed beyond the beginning stages it is better for them
to deal with things concerning the divinity and flee from
corporeal things. Nonetheless, they will not make me admit
that such a road is a good one. Now it could be that I'm
mistaken and that we are all saying the same thing. But I
myself see that the devil tried to deceive me in this matter, and
thus I have so learned my lesson from experience that I think,
although I've spoken on this topic at other times,3 I will speak
of it again here that you will proceed very carefully in this
matter. And take notice that I dare say you should not believe
anyone who tells you something else. I'll try to explain myself
better than I did elsewhere. If anyone perhaps has written
what a certain person told me, this would be good if the matter
is explained at length, but to speak of it so summarily could do
much harm to those of us who are not well informed. 4
     6. It will also seem to some souls that they cannot think
about the Passion, or still less about the Blessed Virgin and the
lives of the saints; the remembrance of both of these latter is so
very helpful and encouraging. I cannot imagine what such
souls are thinking of. To be always withdrawn from corporeal
things and enkindled in love is the trait of angelic spirits, not of
those who live in mortal bodies. It's necessary that we speak to,
think about, and become the companions of those who, having
had a mortal body, accomplished such great feats for God. How
much more is it necessary not to withdraw through one's own
efforts from all our good and help, which is the most sacred
humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ. I cannot believe that these
souls do so, but they just don't understand; and they will do
harm to themselves and to others. At least I assure them that
they will not enter these last two dwelling places. For if they
                                145
                      TERESA OF AVILA

lose the guide, who is the good Jesus, they will not hit on the
right road. It will be quite an accomplishment if they remain
safely in the other dwelling places. The Lord Himself says that
He is the way; the Lord says also that He is the light and that
no one can go to the Father but through Him, and "anyone
who sees me sees my Father."5 They will say that another
meaning is given to these words. I don't know about those oth­
er meanings; I have got along very well with this one that my
soul always feels to be true.
     7. There are some souls-and there are many who have
spoken about it to me-who brought by our Lord to perfect
contemplation would like to be in that prayer always; but that
is impossible. Yet this favor of the Lord remains with them in
such a way that afterward they cannot engage as before in
discursive thought about the mysteries of the Passion and life
of Christ. I don't know the reason, but this inability is very
common, for the intellect becomes less capable of meditation. I
believe the reason must be that since in meditation the whole
effort consists in seeking God and that once God is found the
soul becomes used to seeking Him again through the work of
the will, the soul doesn't want to tire itself by working with the
intellect. Likewise, it seems to me that since this generous
faculty, which is the will, is already enkindled, it wants to
avoid, if it can, using the other faculty; and it doesn't go wrong.
But to avoid this will be impossible, especially before the soul
reaches these last two dwelling places; and the soul will lose
time, for the will often needs the help of the intellect so as to be
enkindled.
     8. And note this point, Sisters; it is important, and so I
want to explain it further: The soul desires to be completely
occupied in love and does not want to be taken up with
anything else, but to be so occupied is impossible for it even
though it may want to; for although the will is not dead, the
fire that usually makes it burn is dying out, and someone must
necessarily blow on the fire so that heat will be given off.
Would it be good for a soul with this dryness to wait for fire to
come down from heaven to burn this sacrifice that it is making
of itself to God, as did our Father Elijah?6 No, certainly not,
nor is it right to expect miracles. The Lord works them for this
soul when He pleases, as was said and will be said further on. 7
                                146
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE