call to intimacy with God and allow grace to act in his life will
not come to know the meaning of life or bring it to its
fulfillment.
     The experience of personal misery and divine mercy
causes Teresa to feel special affinity with biblical figures who
converted to God: King David, Peter, Paul, Mary Magdalene,
and the Samaritan woman. From conversion to union, the
story is not untypical. God descends to man, and man rises up
and returns to God.
     The asceticism as well as the concept of prayer in her
doctrine is based on friendship. All comes to center on the
divine Friend. Consequently, the attention and the powers of
the human person turn to Him and are directed in His service.
The goal is viewed not in terms of the ordering and perfecting
of human passions and instincts but rather in terms of loving
communion with His Majesty and of good works done in His
service.
     Her definition of prayer, quoted variously in thousands of
books, articles, spiritual conferences, and sermons over the
years, has friendship as its fundamental notion: "Mental prayer
in my opinion is nothing else than an intimate sharing between
friends; it means taking time frequently to be alone with Him
who we know loves us. "30
     The way to this divine friendship is Christ. He "is the one
through whom all blessings come to us."31 Different forms of
friendship can be realized in one's relationship with Christ,
Teresa reflects: He is our Brother who enables us to call God
our Father; He is a companion, especially in times of tribula­
tion; He is a teacher and master who teaches us how to ap­
proach God-particularly in the Our Father; He is, notably in
spiritual union, our Bridegroom or Spouse; He is our Lord, the
Lord of the world, our King, His Majesty.32 In Jesus Christ,
God offers souls human friendship as well as divine. "It is for
you to look at Him," she says; "He never takes His eyes off
you."33
      As with any friendship, prayer develops from the initial
attempts at mutual knowledge to the final simplified and in­
tense relationship of complete union.
      Her intimacy with God is communicated to the reader on
almost every page. Indeed, it is sufficient to read her to be
                               13
                       INTRODUCTION

carried into her own communion with God and swept up in all
the common forms of Christian prayer. Going directly to the
person of Christ, she brings Him to her consciousness as with­
in her or beside her. Speaking to Christ came easily to this
woman gifted with such a wonderful capacity for friendship
and conversation. She asks: "Since you speak with other per­
sons, why must words fail you when you speak with God?"34
     Should we want to discuss a method in Teresa's teaching
on prayer, we would have to begin with her own words:
"Draw near, then, to this good Master . . . . "35 She calls this
practice "recollection," and insists that an important aspect of
prayer is the fundamental truth that God is close, very near.
"All the harm comes from not understanding that He is near."36
Drawing near to God is called recollection because "the soul
collects its faculties together and enters within itself to be with
its God,"37 to look at Him, to be present to Him (who is
present to and looking at us), to center its attention on Him.
     A method of prayer popular in sixteenth-century Spain
was discursive meditation. Teresa admires the many books of
meditation, and though she praises them, she elusively remarks
that they are helpful for those who have methodical minds and
good concentration.38 When she actually teaches a method, she
does not do so in view of those possessing the above talents. To
them she says: " . . . it would be a mistake if you pay attention to
what I say about prayer."39 Instead, she addresses those with
"souls and minds so scattered that they are like wild horses no
one can stop. "40
     Along with the prayer of recollection, then, Teresa sug­
gests for these persons the recitation of vocal prayer, especially
the Our Father, the prayer Christ taught. For Teresa, vocal
prayer without the accompanying prayer of recollection is
unthinkable. She had little use for the cautious advice given to
women at that time to avoid the complexities and dangers of
mental prayer and to be satisfied with vocal prayer alone. The
two, she argues, are inseparable. Thus while reciting vocal
prayer, the gaze, that is, the attention, is fixed in a simple
loving way on Christ, in whom the mystery of God is made
known.
     Teresa says that she "never knew what it was to pray with
satisfaction until the Lord taught me this method."41 The

                                 14
                       INTRODUCTION

method, called so because it is something achievable through
human effort, does not take long to get used to; and through it
one will gradually experience gain through other deeper de­
grees of recollection. 42
     Vocal prayer together with presence to Christ, or recollec­
tion, was the best means Teresa knew for disposing one for
mystical prayer. "The intellect is recollected much more quick­
ly with this kind of prayer even though it may be vocal. . . .
And its divine Master comes more quickly to teach it and give
it the prayer of quiet than He would through any other meth­
od."43
     Vocal prayer of this sort she learned could calm the wild
horses, the restless faculties that were so much a problem to
her: " . . . out of love for the Lord, get used to praying the Our
Father with this recollection, and you will see the benefit
before long. This is a manner of praying that the soul gets so
quickly used to that it doesn't go astray, nor do the faculties
become restless, as time will tell. "44 She then promises that
those who use this method will not fail to drink from the fount
of infused prayer.4S
     Having assured her readers in The Way ofPerfection that the
prayer of the Our Father leads to the fount of living waters, she
refers them to her Life, the book in which she describes what
the soul feels when it drinks this living water, how God satis­
fies and takes away thirst for earthly things.

                    THE INTERIOR CASTLE
     Some ten years later, on May 28, 1 577, for basically the
same reasons, she was speaking again of what was contained in
her Life, but this time the result was the command to write
another book since the Life was then in the scrupulously cau­
tious hands of the Inquisition. The scene of the fateful incident
was Toledo at the Carmel newly founded by Teresa. Fr. Gra­
tian, her confessor and also, as a Carmelite friar, an enthusiastic
supporter in her reform, has left us his account of the event:
"What took place with regard to the book of the Dwelling Places
is that while I was superior and speaking with her once in
Toledo of many things concerning her spirit, she said to me:
'Oh, how well this point was described in the book about my

                                15
                       INTRODUCTION

life, which is in the Inquisition!' I answered: 'Since we cannot
have it, recall what you can and other things and write another
book, but put down the doctrine in a general way without
naming the one to whom the things you mentioned there
happened.' And thus I ordered her to write this book of the
Dwelling Places."46
      Now sixty-two years old, Teresa had for five years been
aware of the depth of spiritual life she describes as the ultimate
stage of the mystical journey. She had come, then, to an experi­
ential grasp of so much more than what she had written
previously in her Life. In evidence of this, toward the outset of
her Interior Castle she admits: "And although in other things
I've written the Lord has given me some understanding, I
know there were certain things I had not understood as I have
come to understand them now, especially certain more difficult
things."47