eat-not so much for her sake as because you know it is your
Lord's desire. This is true union with His will; and if you see a
person praised, the Lord wants you to be much happier than if
you yourself were being praised. This, indeed, is easy, for if
you have humility you will feel sorry to see yourself praised.
But this happiness that comes when the virtues of the Sisters
are known is a very good thing; and when we see some fault in
them, it is also a very good thing to be sorry and hide the fault
as though it were our own.
      1 2 . I have said a lot on this subject elsewhere, 12 because I
see, Sisters, that if we fail in love of neighbor we are lost. May
it please the Lord that this will never be so; for if you do not
fail, I tell you that you shall receive from His Majesty the
union that was mentioned. When you see yourselves lacking in
this love, even though you have devotion and gratifying experi­
ences that make you think you have reached this stage, and you
experience some little suspension in the prayer of quiet (for to
some it then appears that everything has been accomplished),
believe me, you have not reached union. And beg our Lord to
give you this perfect love of neighbor. Let His Majesty have a
free hand, for He will give you more than you know how to
desire because you are striving and making every effort to do
what you can about this love. And force your will to do the will
of your Sisters in everything, even though you may lose your
rights; forget your own good for their sakes no matter how
much resistance your nature puts up; and, when the occasion
arises, strive to accept work yourself so as to relieve your
neighbor of it. Don't think that it won't cost you anything or
that you will find everything done for you. Look at what our
Spouse's love for us cost Him; in order to free us from death,
He died that most painful death on the cross.
                          CHAPTER FOUR
     Continues with the same subject, explaining further this kind of
prayer. 1 Tells how important it is to walk with care because the devil
himself uses a great deal of care in trying to make one turn back from
what was begun.
     1 . It seems to me you have a desire to see what this little
dove is doing and where it rests since as was explained it rests
neither in spiritual delights nor in earthly consolations. Its
                                  102
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

flight is higher, and I cannot satisfy your desire until the last
dwelling place. May it please God that I then remember or
have the time to write of this. About five months have passed
since I began, 2 and because my head is in no condition to read
over what I've written, everything will have to continue with­
out order, and perhaps some things will be said twice. Since
this work is for my Sisters, the disorder won't matter much.
      2. Nonetheless, I want to explain more to you about what
I think this prayer of union is. In accordance with my style, I
shall draw a comparison. Later on we'll say more about this
little butterfly. Although it is always bearing fruit by doing
good for itself and for other souls, it never stops to rest, because
it fails to find its true repose.
      3 . You've already often heard that God espouses souls
spiritually. Blessed be His mercy that wants so much to be
humbled! And even though the comparison may be a coarse
one I cannot find another that would better explain what I
mean than the sacrament of marriage. This spiritual espousal is
different in kind from marriage, for in these matters that we
are dealing with there is never anything that is not spiritual.
Corporal things are far distant from them, and the spiritual
joys the Lord gives when compared to the delights married
people must experience are a thousand leagues distant. For it is
all a matter of love united with love, and the actions of love are
most pure and so extremely delicate and gentle that there is no
way of explaining them, but the Lord knows how to make
them very clearly felt.
      4. It seems to me that the prayer of union does not yet
reach the stage of spiritual betrothal. Here below when two
people are to be engaged, there is discussion about whether
they are alike, whether they love each other, and whether they
might meet together so as to become more satisfied with each
other. So, too, in the case of this union with God, the agree­
ment has been made, and this soul is well informed about the
goodness of her Spouse and determined to do His will in
everything and in as many ways as she sees might make Him
happy. And His Majesty, as one who understands clearly
whether these things about His betrothed are so, is happy with
her. As a result He grants this mercy, for He desired her to
know Him more and that they might meet together, as they
                                103
                     TERESA OF AVILA

say, and be united. 3 We can say that union is like this, for it
passes in a very short time. In it there no longer takes place the
exchanging of gifts, but the soul sees secretly who this Spouse
is that she is going to accept. Through the work of the senses
and the faculties she couldn't in any way or in a thousand years
understand what she understands here in the shortest time. But
being who He is, the Spouse from that meeting alone leaves her
more worthy for the joining of hands, as they say. The soul is
left so much in love that it does for its part all it can to avoid
disturbing this divine betrothal. But if it is careless about
placing its affection in something other than Him, it loses
everything. And the loss is as great as the favors He was
granting her, and cannot be exaggerated.
      5. For this reason, I ask Christian souls whom the Lord
has brought to these boundaries that for His sake they not
grow careless but withdraw from occasions. Even in this state
the soul is not so strong that it can place itself in the occasions
as it will be after the betrothal is made. The betrothal belongs
to the dwelling place we shall speak of after this one. This
present communication amounts to no more than a meeting, as
they say. And the devil will go about very carefully in order to
fight against and prevent this betrothal. Afterward, since he
sees the soul entirely surrendered to the Spouse, he doesn't
dare do so much, because he fears it. He has experienced that if
sometimes he tries he is left with a great loss, and the soul with
further gain.
     6. I tell you, daughters, that I have known persons who
had ascended high and had reached this union, who were
turned back and won over by the devil with his deep cunning
and deceit. All hell must join for such a purpose because, as I
have often said,4 in losing one soul of this kind, not only one is
lost but a multitude. The devil already has experience in this
matter. Look at the multitude of souls God draws to Himself
by means of one. He is to be greatly praised for the thousands
converted by the martyrs: for a young girl like Saint Ursula;
for those the devil must have lost through Saint Dominic, Saint
Francis, and other founders of religious orders, and those he
now loses through Father Ignatius, the one who founded the
Society. Clearly, all of these received, as we read, similar favors
from God. How would this have come about if they hadn't
                                104
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE