feited by the devil, but the soul is wholly sure that the favor
comes from God; for, as I have said,9 the faculties and senses
have nothing to do with what goes on in this dwelling place.
His Majesty reveals Himself to the soul and brings it to Him­
self in that place where, in my opinion, the devil will not dare
enter, nor will the Lord allow him to enter. Nor does the Lord
in all the favors He grants the soul here, as I have said, 10
receive any assistance from the soul itself, except what it has
already done in surrendering itself totally to God.
      1 1 . Every way in which the Lord helps the soul here, and
all He teaches it, takes place with such quiet and so noiselessly
that, seemingly to me, the work resembles the building of
Solomon's temple where no sound was heard. 1 1 So in this
temple of God, in this His dwelling place, He alone and the
soul rejoice together in the deepest silence. There is no reason
for the intellect to stir or seek anything, for the Lord who
created it wishes to give it repose here and that through a small
crevice it might observe what is taking place. At times this
sight is lost and the other faculties do not allow the intellect to
look, but this happens for only a very short time. In my
opinion, the faculties are not lost here;12 they do not work, but
remain as though in amazement.
     12. I am amazed as well to see that when the soul arrives
here all raptures are taken away. Only once in a while are they
experienced and then without those transports and that flight
of the spirit. They happen very rarely and almost never in
public as they very often did before. Nor do the great occasions
of devotion cause the soul concern as previously. Nor if souls
in this dwelling place see a devout image or hear a sermon­
previously it was almost as though they didn't hear it-or
music are they worried as was the poor little butterfly that
went about so apprehensive that everything frightened it and
made it fly. Now the reason could be that in this dwelling place
either the soul has found its repose, or has seen so much that
nothing frightens it, or that it doesn't feel that solitude it did
before since it enjoys such company. In sum, Sisters, I don't
know what the cause may be. For when the Lord begins to
show what there is in this dwelling place and to bring the soul
there, this great weakness is taken away. The weakness was a
severe trial for the soul and previously was not taken away.
                                186
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

Perhaps the reason is that the Lord has now fortified, enlarged,
and made the soul capable. Or it could be that His Majesty
wished to make known publicly that which He did with these
souls in secret for certain reasons He knows, for His judgments
are beyond all that we can imagine here below.
     1 3 . These effects, along with all the other good ones from
the degrees of prayer we mentioned, are given by God when
He brings the soul to Himself with this kiss sought by the
bride, 13 for I think this petition is here granted. Here an
abundance of water is given to this deer that was wounded.
Here one delights in God's tabernacle. Here the dove Noah
sent out to see if the storm was over finds the olive branch as a
sign of firm ground discovered amid the floods and tempests of
this world. 0 Jesus! Who would know the many things there
must be in Scripture to explain this peace of soul! My God,
since You see how important it is for us, grant that Christians
will seek it; and in Your mercy do not take it away from those
to whom You have given it. For, in the end, people must
always live with fear until You give them true peace and bring
them there where that peace will be unending. I say "true
peace," not because this peace is not true but because the first
war could return if we were to withdraw from God.
     14. But what will these souls feel on seeing that they could
lack so great a blessing? Seeing this makes them proceed more
carefully and seek to draw strength from their weakness so as
not to abandon through their own fault any opportunity to
please God more. The more favored they are by His Majesty
the more they are afraid and fearful of themselves. And since
through His grandeurs they have come to a greater knowledge
of their own miseries, and their sins become more serious to
them, they often go about like the publican 14 not daring to
raise their eyes. At other times they go about desiring to die so
as to be safe; although, with the love they have, soon they again
want to live in order to serve Him, as was said. 15 And in
everything concerning themselves they trust in His mercy.
Sometimes the many favors make them feel more annihilated,
for they fear that just as a ship too heavily laden sinks to the
bottom they will go down too.
     1 5. I tell you, Sisters, that the cross is not wanting but it
doesn't disquiet or make them lose peace. For the storms, like a
                                187
                       TERESA OF AVILA

wave, pass quickly. And the fair weather returns, because the
presence of the Lord they experience makes them soon forget
everything. May He be ever blessed and praised by all His
creatures, amen.

                         CHAPTER FOUR
     Concludes by explaining what she thinks our Lord's purpose is in
granting such great favors to the soul and how it is necessary that
Martha and Mary join together. This chapter is very beneficial.
      1 . You must not think, Sisters, that the effects I men­
tioned 1 are always present in these souls. Hence, where I
remember, I say "ordinarily." For sometimes our Lord leaves
these individuals in their natural state, and then it seems that
all the poisonous creatures from the outskirts and other dwell­
ing places of this castle band together to take revenge for the
time they were unable to have these souls under their control.
     2. True, this natural state lasts only a short while, a day at
most or a little more. And in this great disturbance, usually
occasioned by some event, the soul's gain through the good
company it is in becomes manifest. For the Lord gives the soul
great stability and good resolutions not to deviate from His
service in anything. But it seems this determination increases,
and these souls do not deviate through even a very slight first
movement. As I say, this disturbance is rare, but our Lord does
not want the soul to forget its being, so that, for one thing, it
might always be humble; for another, that it might better
understand the tremendous favor it receives, what it owes His
Majesty, and that it might praise Him.
      3. Nor should it pass through your minds that, since these
souls have such determination and strong desires not to com­
mit any imperfection for anything on earth, they fail to commit
many imperfections, and even sins. Advertently, no; for the
Lord must give souls such as these very particular help against
such a thing. I mean venial sins, for from what these souls can
understand they are free from mortal sins, although not im­
mune. That they might have some sins they don't know about
is no small torment to them. They also suffer torment in seeing
souls go astray. Even though in some way they have great hope
that they themselves will not be among these souls, they cannot
                                 1 88
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE