7. Nor did Moses know how to describe all that he saw in
the bush, but only what God wished Him to describe.9 But if
God had not shown secrets to his soul along with a certitude
that made him recognize and believe that they were from God,
Moses could not have entered into so many severe trials. But he
must have understood such deep things among the thorns of
that bush that the vision gave him the courage to do what he
did for the people of Israel. So, Sisters, we don't have to look
for reasons to understand the hidden things of God. Since we
believe He is powerful, clearly we must believe that a worm
with as limited a power as ours will not understand His gran足
deurs. Let us praise Him, for He is pleased that we come to
know some of them.
     8. I have been wanting to find some comparison by which
to explain what I'm speaking about, and I don't think there is
any that fits. But let's use this one: You enter into the room of a
king or great lord, or I believe they call it the treasure chamber,
where there are countless kinds of glass and earthen vessels and
other things so arranged that almost all of these objects are seen
upon entering. Once I was brought to a room like this in the
house of the Duchess of Alba where, while I was on a journey,
obedience ordered me to stay because of this lady's insistence
with my superiors. 10 I was amazed on entering and wondered
what gain could be gotten from that conglomeration of things,
and I saw that one could praise the Lord at seeing so many
different kinds of objects, and now I laugh to myself on realiz足
ing how the experience has helped me here in my explanation.
Although I was in that room for a while, there was so much
there to see that I soon forgot it all; none of those pieces has
remained in my memory any more than if I had never seen
them, nor would I know how to explain the workmanship of
any of them. I can only say in general that I remember seeing
everything. Likewise with this favor, the soul, while it is made
one with God, is placed in this empyreal room that we must
have interiorly. For, clearly, the soul has some of these dwell足
ing places since God abides within it. And although the Lord
must not want the soul to see these secrets every time it is in
this ecstasy, for it can be so absorbed in enjoying Him that a
sublime good like that is sufficient for it, sometimes He is
pleased that the absorption decrease and the soul see at once
                                1 29
                     TERESA OF AVILA

what is in that room. After it returns to itself, the soul is left
with that representation of the grandeurs it saw; but it cannot
describe any of them, nor do its natural powers grasp any more
than what God wished that it see supernaturally.
     9. You, therefore, might object that I admit that the soul
sees and that the vision is an imaginative one. But I'm not
saying that, for I'm not dealing with an imaginative vision but
with an intellectual one. Since I have no learning, I don't know
how in my dullness to explain anything. If what I have said up
to now about this prayer is worthwhile, I know clearly that I'm
not the one who has said it.
     I hold that if at times in its raptures the soul doesn't
understand these secrets, its raptures are not given by God but
are caused by some natural weakness. It can happen to persons
with a weak constitution, as is so with women, that any spiritu足
al force will overcome the natural powers, and the soul will be
absorbed as I believe I mentioned in reference to the prayer of
quiet. 1 1 These experiences have nothing to do with rapture. In
a rapture, believe me, God carries off for Himself the entire
soul, and, as to someone who is His own and His spouse, He
begins showing it some little part of the kingdom that it has
gained by being espoused to Him. However small that part of
His kingdom may be, everything that there is in this great God
is magnificent. And He doesn't want any hindrance from
anyone, neither from the faculties nor from the senses, but He
immediately commands the doors of all these dwelling places to
be closed; and only that door to His room remains open so that
we can enter. Blessed be so much mercy; they will be rightly
cursed who have not wanted to benefit by it and who have lost
this Lord.
     10. 0 my Sisters, what nothingness it is, that which we
leave! Nor is what we do anything, nor all that we could do for
a God who thus wishes to communicate Himself to a worm!
And if we hope to enjoy this blessing even in this present life,
what are we doing? What is causing us to delay? What is
enough to make us, even momentarily, stop looking for this
Lord as did the bride in the streets and in the squares? 12 Oh,
what a mockery everything in the world is if it doesn't lead us
and help us toward this blessing even if its delights and riches
and joys, as much of them as imaginable, were to last forever! It
                               130
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE