feel, love or experience is not Him, for He is beyond all my
modes of apprehension and of possession.
      I can be transformed and united with Him, I can be God,
only if I leave absolutely everything that I feel, like, think and
experience and even what I "imagine" to be, and it is He who
takes possession of me and takes me and "remakes" me. And
only thus is our real personality realised. This is the action of
Grace within me. Here the importance of the creature is re­
placed by the absolute power of God. The naked way of pure
faith is neither a blind belief, nor a desperate effort in saving
myself, but it is the divine and gratuitous gift bestowed upon
me which calls me and transforms me. I do not rely anymore
upon myself, but on God alone.
      "God has only spoken One Word which is His Son and He
has spoken It in eternal silence," says St. John of the Cross, re­
peating a common statement of the Fathers of the Church. In
order to be incorporated in Him we must enter into that Si­
lence, not only reducing to stillness all voices, images and
thoughts about everything and even about God Himself, but
reducing our very being into an ontological silence. "In order
to have the All you must leave the all," including ourselves.
      The real, the royal path to God taught by this great con­
templative is not that of mere contemplation of God as an ob­
ject, is not the purified and high contemplative gaze on or expe­
rience of God; our gaze has to transcend all our powers and
faculties and even our own being. In Christian terms it is the
naked and supernatural way of pure faith as a participation of
God's own knowledge and Light, as an introduction to the di­
vine Life in us, which is supported, so to say, in us through His
gifts of Faith, Hope and Charity. The progress of a spiritual
person towards God is rather the progress of God in him or
her. The ascent to the mountain on a person's part corresponds
to the more real descent of God into his/her being.
      Once, St. Teresa was amorously complaining to God in
prayer about her sufferings and trials. She heard the Lord tell­
ing her: "Teresa, so do I treat My friends!" making her thereby
understand the purificatory character of suffering. But Teresa,
who knew it already, answered boldly: "That's why you have so
few (friends)." Some have pointed out the difficulty and the im-


                              xvn
                            PREFACE

possibility of following the doctrine of our Carmelite saint, er­
roneously taken to be an inhuman self-denial. If we think in
terms of human courage, it is true that the thorough spoilation
of one's self exacted by her for the purpose of reaching the Sim­
ple One is above human strength, and so if such spoilation is
undertaken out of a selfish spiritual greediness, it would be not
only impossible but also antinatural. No human force can per­
form that work and walk along the path of absolute denial, by
the very reason, that if there is no God sustaining us, even from
below, nothing remains under our feet. It is quite true that no
one by mere human force can climb up to the top of the moun­
tain where God dwells. It is God and God alone who calls and
gives the gifts and necessary graces to such an ascent.

3. The Sanctity of the Carmelite Saint
     Manifold and wonderful is God in His saints. Some sparks
of His perfection shine forth in these selected ones. Simplicity,
love, obedience, spiritual power, personality, and so many oth­
er values are reflected in the lives of the saints. Which is the
special feature of this mystic?
     I would dare to say that her characteristic feature, which at
the same time constitutes an urgent and important message for
our times, is simply that of sanctity itself. And perhaps this is
also the feature of the other great saint of the Carmel of our
days, St. Therese of Lisieux, the Little Flower.
     Obviously, by the very fact that one is a saint he or she re­
flects the sanctity of God, but the colour of the divine light
may be the red colour of love, or the green of hope, or the violet
of penance, or the infra-red of an unsophisticated surrender, or
the ultra-violet of mysticism and so on.
     In spite of her rich personality and the high mystical gifts
with which she was endowed, she does not insist on or preach
only contemplation and mysticism, she does not want every­
body to deny the world, nor does she make self-denial her cen­
tral doctrine. She simply preaches and lives a holy life: that is
to say, sanctity, pure and unalloyed. The rest is ultimately ir­
relevant and all are means for the "only one thing necessary."
Her writings were written under obedience. And yet her books
are truly universal and the example of her life, in spite of the


                               XV Ill
                                     PREFACE


particular scope of her activities, constitutes a lesson for every
religious soul.
     What ultimately matters is not our ideas, or our experi­
ences or our denying this or doing that; what "matters" is not a
method of prayer or a peculiar way of life. The all-important
thing, the unique and the ultimate end of man is sanctity,
union with God, transformation in God, divinisation of our
full being.
     Throughout the whole of the 16th century Europe was
suffering from a world crisis in all aspects. Everywhere prob­
lems and solutions were planned and enforced in the horizon­
tal line. The answer of the Carmelite nun has only a single
tune: sanctity. But not a sanctity of the nature of a selfish self­
reform, not an individualistic saintliness in order to arrange
the world and solve its problems, or to save oneself, i.e., as
means for something else, or as first condition, but a true sanc­
tity as an end in itself, because the ontological weight of a di­
vinised person is greater than anything else, because the mean­
ing of life on earth-this "bad night in a bad inn"-is not to
organise heaven on earth, but to move earth into heaven. And
yet, as a consequence, as something that comes from itself, it is
the only real approach to the world. According to its deep na­
ture, will life on earth be truly human and happy and beauti­
ful. "Is it not somehow amazing that a poor nun of St. Joseph's
Cloister can reign over the whole earth and elements?"* It is
the least world-denying attitude imaginable, because it sees the
whole creation as an outburst of divine Love. Only then will
humankind be the king of creation and transform everything
into the real everlasting Kingdom, which is much more than a
mere temporal world.
     The reason is clear: I am not more mine, but it is God that
is in me and I in Him. That is the Christian mystery of Christ!
   •st. Teresa,   Life, VI,   104.




                                      XIX
                    INTRODUCTION




     The Second Vatican Council pointed out that by penetrat­
ing the revealed message the Christian mystics enrich our
comprehension of it and thereby contribute to the Church's
living tradition. 1 Among the mystics, Saint Teresa of Avila
holds a unique position as a witness to divine realities. Her
common sense, humor, and penchant for everyday images liven
her writings; but she is above all remarkable for her analytical
abilities in probing the mystery of God's workings in the soul.
On September 27, 1970, Pope Paul VI proclaimed Teresa a
Doctor of the Church. During the ceremony the pope spoke of
her as a teacher of "marvelous profundity."2