Majesty will provide. Or, He will be pleased to make me
remember what I have said at other times, for I would be
happy even with this. My memory is so poor that I would be
glad if I could repeat, in case they've been lost, some of the
things that I was told were well said.2 If the Lord doesn't make
me remember, I will gain just by tiring myself and getting a
worse headache for the sake of obedience-even though no
benefit will be drawn from what I say.
      3 . And so I'm beginning to comply today, the feast of the
most Blessed Trinity, in the year 1 577, in this Carmelite mon­
astery of Saint Joseph in Toledo where I am at present.3 In all
that I say I submit to the opinion of the ones who ordered me
to write, for they are persons of great learning.4 If I should say
something that isn't in conformity with what the holy Roman
Catholic Church holds, it will be through ignorance and not
through malice. This can be held as certain, and also that
through the goodness of God I always am, and will be, and
have been subject to her. May He be always blessed and glori­
fied, amen.
     4. The one who ordered me to write told me that the nuns
in these monasteries of our Lady of Mount Carmel need some­
one to answer their questions about prayer and that he thought
they would better understand the language used between wom­
en, and that because of the love they bore me they would pay
more attention to what I would tell them. I thus understood
that it was important for me to manage to say something. So, I
shall be speaking to them while I write; it's nonsense to think
that what I say could matter to other persons. Our Lord will be
granting me favor enough if some of these nuns benefit by
praising Him a little more. His Majesty well knows that I don't
aim for anything else. And it should be very clear that if I
manage to say something well the Sisters will understand that
this does not come from me since there would be no foundation
for it, unless the Lord gave it to me; otherwise they would have
as little intelligence as I ability for such things.




                                34
      THE FIRST DWELLING PLACES


                  CONTAINS TWO CHAPTERS




                          CHAPTER ONE
     Discusses the beauty and dignity of our souls. Draws a comparison
in order to explain, and speaks of the benefit that comes from under­
standing this truth and knowing about the favors we receive from God
and how the door to this castle is prayer.
     1 . Today while beseeching our Lord to speak for me be­
cause I wasn't able to think of anything to say nor did I know
how to begin to carry out this obedience, there came to my
mind what I shall now speak about, that which will provide us
with a basis to begin with. It is that we consider our soul to be
like a castle made entirely out of a diamond or of very clear
crystal, in which there are many rooms, just as in heaven there
are many dwelling places. 1 For in reflecting upon it carefully,
Sisters, we realize that the soul of the just person is nothing
else but a paradise where the Lord says He finds His delight.2
So then, what do you think that abode will be like where a
King so powerful, so wise, so pure, so full of all good things
takes His delight? I don't find anything comparable to the
magnificent beauty of a soul and its marvelous capacity. In­
deed, our intellects, however keen, can hardly comprehend it,
just as they cannot comprehend God; but He Himself says that
He created us in His own image and likeness.3
     Well if this is true, as it is, there is no reason to tire
ourselves in trying to comprehend the beauty of this castle.
Since this castle is a creature and the difference, therefore,
between it and God is the same as that between the Creator and
                                  35
                     TERESA OF AVILA

His creature, His Majesty in saying that the soul is made in His
own image makes it almost impossible for us to understand the
sublime dignity and beauty of the soul.
     2. It is a shame and unfortunate that through our own
fault we don't understand ourselves or know who we are.
Wouldn't it show great ignorance, my daughters, if someone
when asked who he was didn't know, and didn't know his
father or mother or from what country he came? Well now, if
this would be so extremely stupid, we are incomparably more
so when we do not strive to know who we are, but limit
ourselves to considering only roughly these bodies. Because we
have heard and because faith tells us so, we know we have
souls. But we seldom consider the precious things that can be
found in this soul, or who dwells within it, or its high value.
Consequently, little effort is made to preserve its beauty. All
our attention is taken up with the plainness of the diamond's
setting or the outer wall of the castle; that is, with these bodies
of ours.
     3. Well, let us consider that this castle has, as I said,4 many
dwelling places: some up above, others down below, others to
the sides; and in the center and middle is the main dwelling
place where the very secret exchanges between God and the
soul take place.
     It's necessary that you keep this comparison in mind.
Perhaps God will be pleased to let me use it to explain some­
thing to you about the favors He is happy to grant souls and
the differences between these favors. I shall explain them ac­
cording to what I have understood as possible. For it is impossi­
ble that anyone understand them all since there are many; how
much more so for someone as wretched as I. It will be a great
consolation when the Lord grants them to you if you know
that they are possible; and for anyone to whom He doesn't, it
will be a great consolation to praise His wonderful goodness.
Just as it doesn't do us any harm to reflect on the things there
are in heaven and what the blessed enjoy-but rather we
rejoice and strive to attain what they enjoy-it doesn't do us
any harm to see that it is possible in this exile for so great a
God to commune with such foul-smelling worms; and, on
seeing this, come to love a goodness so perfect and a mercy so
immeasurable. I hold as certain that anyone who might be
                                36
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE