and that the door of entry to this castle is prayer. Well now, it
is foolish to think that we will enter heaven without entering
into ourselves, coming to know ourselves, reflecting on our
misery and what we owe God, and begging Him often for
mercy. The Lord Himself says: No one will ascend to My Father
but through Me13 (I don't know if He says it this way-1 think
He does) and whoever sees Me sees My Father. 14 Well, if we never
look at Him or reflect on what we owe Him and the death He
suffered for us, I don't know how we'll be able to know Him or
do works in His service. And what value can faith have without
works and without joining them to the merits of Jesus Christ,
our Good? Or who will awaken us to love this Lord?
     May it please His Majesty to give us understanding of how
much we cost Him, of how the servant is no greater than his
master, 15 and that we must work in order to enjoy His glory.
And we need to pray for this understanding so that we aren't
always entering into temptation.16




                               54
    THE THIRD DWELLING PLACES


                  CONTAINS TWO CHAPTERS




                          CHAPTER ONE
      Treats of what little security we can have while living in this
exile, even though we may have reached a high state, and of how we
should walk with fear. This chapter has some good points.
      1 . What shall we say to those who through perseverance
and the mercy of God have won these battles and have entered
the rooms of the third stage, if not: Blessed is the man whofears the
Lord?1 His Majesty has done no small thing in giving me
understanding right now of what this verse means in the
vernacular, for I am ignorant in matters like this. Certainly we
are right in calling such a man blessed, since if he doesn't turn
back he is, from what we can understand, on the secure path to
his salvation.2 Here you will see, Sisters, how important it was
to win the previous battles. I am certain the Lord never fails to
give a person like this security of conscience, which is no small
blessing. I said "security" and I was wrong, for there is no
security in this life; so always understand that I mean "if he
doesn't abandon the path he began on."
      2. It is a great misery to have to live a life in which we
must always walk like those whose enemies are at their door­
step; they can neither sleep nor eat without weapons and
without being always frightened lest somewhere these enemies
might be able to break through this fortress. 0 my Lord and
my Good, how is it that You want us to desire so miserable a
life, for it isn't possible to stop wanting and asking You to take
us out of it unless there is hope of losing it for You or of
                                 55
                     TERESA OF AVILA

spending it very earnestly in Your service or, above all, of
understanding what Your will is? If it is Your will, my God,
may we die with You, as Saint Thomas said;3 for living without
You and with these fears of the possibility of losing You
forever is nothing else than dying often. That's why, daugh­
ters, I say that the blessedness we must ask for is that of being
already secure with the blessed. For with these fears, what
happiness can anyone have whose whole happiness is to please
God? Consider that this happiness was had-and in much
greater degree-by some saints who fell into serious sins and
that we are not sure that God will help us to get free from these
sins and to do penance for them.
     3 . Certainly, my daughters, I am so fearful as I write this
that I don't know how I'm writing it or how I live when I
think about it, which is very often. Pray, my daughters, that
His Majesty may live in me always. If He doesn't, what securi­
ty can a life as badly spent as mine have? And do not become
sad in knowing that this life has been badly spent, as I have
sometimes observed you become when I tell this to you; you
continue to desire that I might have lived a very holy life-and
you are right. I too would want to have so lived, but what can I
do if I have lost holiness through my own fault! I will not
complain about God who gave me enough help to carry out
your desires. I cannot say this without tears and without being
very ashamed that I am writing something for those who can
teach me. Doing so has been a hard command to obey! May it
please the Lord that since it is being done for Him it may be of
some benefit to you so that You may ask Him to pardon this
miserable and bold creature. But His Majesty well knows that I
can boast only of His mercy, and since I cannot cease being
what I have been, I have no other remedy than to approach His
mercy and to trust in the merits of His Son and of the Virgin,
His Mother, whose habit I wear so unworthily, and you wear.
Praise Him, my daughters, for you truly belong to our Lady.
Thus you have no reason to be ashamed of my misery since you
have such a good Mother. Imitate her and reflect that the
grandeur of our Lady and the good of having her for your
patroness must be indeed great since my sins and my being
what I am have not been enough to tarnish in any way this
sacred order.
                                56
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE