was not embarrassed to admit her pleasure at how a work had
turned out. From time to time, in chapter headings, she goes so
far as to praise her own work and admire the way she dealt
with the matter.2s
     Unlike other great Spanish authors, Teresa had no train­
ing as a writer. Her style is thoroughly spontaneous and unso­
phisticated. Since she wrote the way she spoke, her writings
reflect the language of the Castilian people of her time. It is
natural, direct, colorful, and incisive. With a mind always
quick to see the thousand aspects of a subject, she is lured into
sentences that become hopelessly involved, parentheses and
digressions piling one on the other, but she never bothers to
disentangle them. She takes little care about grammar. There
are no paragraphs or punctuation of any kind. The sense must
often be gathered from the context. Yet despite all the short­
comings, there remains a basic logic, a colorful spontaneity,
and a colloquial simplicity and wit that more than compensate
for the defects. Teresa's writings are a treasure and a delight to
read. Those who had the privilege of observing her write have
testified that she could do so as rapidly as any public notary.
She never paused to reflect, or correct a word, or cross one out.
She once summed it all up herself when she said she wished she
could write with both hands so that all the ideas pouring into
her head could be gotten on paper.
     None of Teresa's writings fails to have a spiritual charac­
ter. Even her business letters have a way of linking the profane
to the spiritual.

                             WORKS
     Teresa's literary production took place during the final
twenty years of her life and in submission for the most part to
directors and confessors who believed it to be a means of better
understanding both this unusual person and God's ways of
communing with His creatures. Even in the year before her
death, Teresa was still called on to write an account of her
spiritual state for the bishop of Osma, a former confessor of
hers.29 She finished the Foundations only a few months before
her death.


                                10
                       INTRODUCTION

      The major works and many of the shorter ones and letters
have been preserved complete in their autographs and are in
good condition. This obviates a number of critical problems
and complications that are met with in the presentation of
some other spiritual classics.
      Her Life, which has come to us in its final version complet­
 ed in 1 565 and written for the scrutiny of her confessors, tells
 of her early years, of God's graces and her failures, and about
 her vocation, her severe illnesses and spiritual struggles. After
 a small treatise on prayer inserted in the middle of her story,
 she takes up again the account of her experiences, feeling
 assured that the reader may now grasp more easily the unusual
 mystical path along which she was led and which worked a
 striking change in her. In the final part of this book, she tells
 the story of her first foundation and, in addition, the further
 favors, the knowledge of which, she thinks, will be beneficial to
 the reader. As a result of her personal experience she is able to
 protest vigorously against those who belittle the favors be­
 stowed lavishly by God in the mystical life and, on the other
 hand, against those who think these favors can be evoked
 through various clever skills and techniques.
       The Way of Perfection, existing in two redactions, was writ­
 ten in its first and less inhibited form sometime between 1 562
 and 1 566. After comments from the censors, it was completed
 in its revised form at the latest by 1 569. In this book of basic
 teaching destined for her Sisters, Teresa begins by expounding
 her reasons for the new Carmel, reflecting on how the life of
 prayer must be for the service of the Church. But to live this
 life of unceasing prayer, as the Carmelite rule prescribes, Tere­
 sa insists that peace of soul is necessary. Peace of soul, as a
 disposition for growth in prayer, is fostered by the practice of
 detachment (evangelical poverty of spirit), love of neighbor,
 and humility. After these preliminary but essential teachings,
 she takes up the topic of mental prayer. She explains how vocal
 prayer requires mental prayer and how this vocal prayer does
 not impede even pure contemplation. All these reflections lead
 to her masterful commentary on the Our Father, Christ's
 prayer in which she discovers the entire spiritual journey from
 the beginning stages to the point where God engulfs the soul in


                                11
                       INTRODUCTION

union and gives it to drink from the fount of living water.
     Another work Teresa wrote at Saint Joseph's in Avila and
finished in its first form there, perhaps in 1 567, is the small but
doctrinally rich Meditations on the Song of Songs. This treatise
begins with an analysis of the various kinds of false peace and
goes on to examine true peace; in this work she speaks once
more of the prayer of quiet and of union.
     The Foundations, begun in August 1 57 3 , tells the history,
with its many vicissitudes, of the establishment of the other
Carmels founded after Saint Joseph's. She carries the reader
into the practical problems of everyday life and combines
materials from the sacred and the profane, the active and the
contemplative life; and she forms with these the brilliant pat­
terns of her spirituality. This is the case as well with the 440
Letters that have come down to us, most of them from the last
six years of her life.
     But if asked to single out one work as her masterpiece,
most of those acquainted with the Teresian writings would
probably choose The Interior Castle. Since it is this contribution
that is chosen for this series, the work will be discussed with
greater detail later in this introduction.
     Other works by Teresa are: the Spiritual Testimonies (some
brief accounts of favors she received and also some accounts of
her interior state written for her spiritual directors, one of
these for the consultants of the Inquisition), the Soliloquies, her
Constitutions and Manner of Visiting Monasteries, Poetry, and a few
other miscellaneous works.

                        BASIC DOCTRINE
     Teresa did not elaborate a system of thought or attempt a
theoretical framework. Her preference is clearly for direct
testimony, which she uses in turn for teaching purposes. Her
terminology is inconsistent. She takes no care to remain faith­
ful to the steps she worked out in her previous books. The four
degrees of prayer, for example, described in the Life, do not co­
incide with those explained in The Interior Castle. What is true is
that her story has universal application. The exceptional favors
she receives are an indication of God's overflowing mercy and
goodness. No one is precluded. Whoever does not follow this
                                 12
                      INTRODUCTION