parison I have come up with. This delightful pain-and it is
not pain-is not continuous, although sometimes it lasts a long
while; at other times it goes away quickly. This depends on the
way the Lord wishes to communicate it, for it is not something
that can be procured in any human way. But even though it
sometimes lasts for a long while, it comes and goes. To sum up,
it is never permanent. For this reason it doesn't set the soul on
fire; but just as the fire is about to start, the spark goes out and
the soul is left with the desire to suffer again that loving pain
the spark causes.
      5. Here there is no reason to wonder whether the experi­
ence is brought on naturally or caused by melancholy, or
whether it is some trick of the devil or some illusion. It is
something that leaves clear understanding of how this activity
comes from the place where the Lord, who is unchanging,
dwells. The activity is not like that found in other feelings of
devotion, where the great absorption in delight can make us
doubtful. Here all the senses and faculties remain free of any
absorption, wondering what this could be, without hindering
anything or being able, in my opinion, to increase or take away
that delightful pain.
      Anyone to whom our Lord may have granted this favor­
for if He has, that fact will be recognized on reading this­
should thank Him very much. Such a person doesn't have to
fear deception. Let his great fear be that he might prove un­
grateful for so generous a favor, and let him strive to better his
entire life, and to serve, and he will see the results and how he
receives more and more. In fact, I know a person4 who received
this favor for some years and was so pleased with it that had
she served the Lord through severe trials for a great number of
years she would have felt well repaid by it. May He be blessed
forever, amen.
      6. You may wonder why greater security is present in this
favor than in other things. In my opinion, these are the rea­
sons: First, the devil never gives delightful pain like this. He
can give the savor and delight that seem to be spiritual, but he
doesn't have the power to join pain-and so much of it-to the
spiritual quiet and delight of the soul. For all of his powers are
on the outside, and the pains he causes are never, in my


                                1 17
                      TERESA OF AVILA

opinion, delightful or peaceful, but disturbing and contentious.
Second, this delightful tempest comes from a region other than
those regions of which he can be lord. Third, the favor brings
wonderful benefits to the soul, the more customary of which
are the determination to suffer for God, the desire to have
many trials, and the determination to withdraw from earthly
satisfactions and conversations and other similar things.
     7. That this favor is no fancy is very clear. Although at
other times the soul may strive to experience this favor, it will
not be able to counterfeit one. And the impulse is something so
manifest that it can in no way be fancied. I mean, one cannot
think it is imagined, when it is not, or have doubts about it. If
some doubt should remain, one must realize that the things
experienced are not true impulses-! mean if there should be
doubt about whether the favor was experienced or not. The
favor is felt as clearly as a loud voice is heard. There's no basis
for thinking it is caused by melancholy, because melancholy
does not produce or fabricate its fancies save in the imagina­
tion. This favor proceeds from the interior part of the soul.
     Now it could be that I'm mistaken, but until I hear other
reasons from someone who understands the experience I will
always have this opinion. And so I know a person who was
quite fearful about being deceived but who never had any fear
of this prayer. s
     8. The Lord also has other ways of awakening the soul:
unexpectedly when it is praying vocally and without thinking
of anything interior, it seems a delightful enkindling will come
upon it as though a fragrance were suddenly to become so
powerful as to spread through all the senses. (I don't say that it
is a fragrance but am merely making this comparison.) Or the
experience is something like this, and it is communicated only
for the sake of making one feel the Spouse's presence there. It
moves the soul to a delightful desire of enjoying Him, and
thereby the soul is prepared to make intense acts of love and
praise of our Lord. This favor rises out of that place I men­
tioned;6 but there is nothing in it that causes pain, nor are the
desires themselves to enjoy God painful. Such is the way the
soul usually experiences it. Neither does it seem to me, for
some of the reasons mentioned, 7 there is anything to fear; but
one should try to receive this favor with gratitude.
                                1 18
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

                         CHAPTER THREE

     Deals with the same subject and tells of the manner in which God,
when pleased, speaks to the soul. Gives counsel about how one should
behave in such a matter and not follow one :r own opinion. Sets down
some signs for discerning when there is deception and when not. This
chapter is very beneficial. 1
     1 . God has another way of awakening the soul. Although
it somehow seems to be a greater favor than those mentioned, 2
it can be more dangerous, and therefore I shall spend some
time considering it. There are many kinds of locutions given to
the soul. Some seem to come from outside oneself; others, from
deep within the interior part of the soul; others, from the
superior part; and some are so exterior that they come through
the sense of hearing, for it seems there is a spoken word.
Sometimes, and often, the locution can be an illusion, especial­
ly in persons with a weak imagination or in those who are
melancholic, I mean who suffer noticeably from melancholy.
     2. In my opinion no attention should be paid to these
latter two kinds of persons even if they say they see and hear
and understand. But neither should one disturb these persons
by telling them their locutions come from the devil; one must
listen to them as to sick persons. The prioress or confessor to
whom they relate their locutions should tell them to pay no
attention to such experiences, that these locutions are not
essential to the service of God, and that the devil has deceived
many by such means, even though this particular person, per­
haps, may not be suffering such deception. This counsel should
be given so as not to aggravate the melancholy, for if they tell
her the locution is due to melancholy, there will be no end to
the matter; she will swear that she sees and hears, for it seems
to her that she does.
     3 . It is true that it's necessary to be firm in taking prayer
away from her and to insist strongly that she pay no attention
to locutions; for the devil is wont to profit from these souls that
are sick in this way, even though what he does may not be to
their harm but to the harm of others. But for both the sick and
the healthy there is always reason to fear these things until the
spirit of such persons is well understood. And I say that in the
beginning it is always better to free these persons from such
                                 1 19
                      TERESA OF AVILA