I. INTRODUCTION-WHAT IS HOLINESS?
     In our anthropocentric (humanistic) times it is common to
hear too much of an anthropomorphic concept of sanctity, con­
sidered as the summit of human perfection. A person is said to
be a saint, in this humanistic climate, when he is perfect. That
is not altogether wrong, but depends on the meaning we give
to the concept of "human perfection". Beauty, for instance, is
undoubtedly a human perfection, but does it strictly belong to
sanctity? Perfection means fullness, completion, and a being is
perfect when it does not lack anything that is due to it, (when it
has no holes). If that being is composite it is required further
that all its parts are blended in a harmonic unity (so that again
it has no gaps). But what is the human being, so that we may
know its perfection? When does a person reach his fullness? Is
there or can there be real sanctity here on earth?
     To follow these philosophical ascending considerations we
would come to the conclusion that only God is perfect and that
consequently holiness is His exclusive attribute, so far as we
can speak of attributes in the Godhead. We could, further, from
here develop some theological-descending reflexions, of some
importance for our subject.
     Only God is holy. Strictly speaking only God is good and
beautiful and true, and even only He is, only He is being. Nev­
ertheless, there is a participation, an analogy, a communication
of all this in the creatures. Our human being-for example­
only "is" and, in consequence, only is good and beautiful and
true insofar as it participates and receives all this from God.

                                Xl
                           PREFACE


But there is something peculiar with sanctity. Every being by
the very fact that it "is", is good and beautiful and true, but is
not holy. It may be sacred, each existence being a participation
in God, but as such it is not holy.
     What is, then, sanctity? It is God Himself, it is His very
Life, His Existence, the proper Structure of His Being, if we
may speak so. God bestows and communicates along with be­
ing all the constitutive attributes of being to the creatures. But
He does not communicate Sanctity, because it cannot properly
be created or given along with being, for it is the very Essence
of God Himself.
     And yet, there are saints on earth, because the Almighty
can still do one thing, namely, communicate and give Himself.
He can descend and dwell in the person of the saint. He can
simply take possession of His creatures in a personal and inti­
mate way. Here lies the role of Christ as an ontic Mediator be­
tween God and Creation.
     So, sanctity is on the one hand an absolute perfection, viz.
God, and on the other hand it is the Life of this very God in
some of His creatures. It is not, in consequence, primarily a
moral concept, but an ontological reality; the divine reality
communicating His intimate and proper Life to some of His
children. The saint is thus not primarily the humanly perfect
Man, but the divinised human person. Of course, that divinisa­
tion implies a very peculiar transformation of the saint and an
ontological-and in consequence also moral-purity, but it
does not require a humanistic perfect man.
     The saint-"santus"-is, thus, the man God has taken spe­
cially for Himself, the man He has "reserved" and "segregat­
ed". God calls everybody to be divinely perfect, i.e., holy. Each
person receives his personal vocation to sanctity. But only the
saint answers fully to that divine call and freely accepts, wills,
loves to be this living Temple of the Holy. Each saint is, in con­
sequence, a kind of Revelation of God, he has a message to de­
liver, though not always with words, he is an instrument of the
Divine, he is the Man (and Woman) in whom God, who is
Love, finds not only His resting but also His acting place. True
sanctity is not so much God-realisation on Man's part, as Man­
realisation on God's part. The saint is the ontological full hu-


                                XII
                                PREFACE


man personality in spite of our rational concepts about human
perfection, and notwithstanding the objective shortcomings in
his pilgrimage towards God. We cannot forget that sanctity is a
concept-limit, only attainable here on earth as far as the ever­
lasting life of Union has already shattered all human
limitations.


                         II. TERESA OF AVILA
     Some saints reflect the perfections of God by their hidden
and silent lives; some others are leaders, some are heroes of sac­
rifice and some victims of love; some have a rather weak human
nature and some are real genii if we look at them from a human
point of view. Sanctity is as manifold as Man and his nature.
     There is, however, not a little difficulty in classifying Te­
resa of Avila. If we class her as contemplative because she
reached the highest degree of fruition of God and union with
Him, we forget that she led an extremely active life. If we rank
her among the teachers, we overlook the fact that she was also a
reformer in the active field as well as a poet.

1.   The example of her life.
     It is almost a foolish presumption to attempt to summarise
the spiritual climate, the political problems and the cultural
crisis of that turning-point in European history which took
place in Spain during the 1 6th Century.• The destiny of the
world, not simply in a political sense or in a superficially cul­
tural interpretation, but in an ontologically real and spiritual
meaning, was, shall we say, not precisely in the hands, but in
the life, hearts and minds of a relatively small number of per­
sons, inhabiting one of the most peculiar corners of Europe.
There was taking place at the time not only the birth of "mod­
ern" Europe, or the end of the "medieval" age, but also the big
conflict and one of the few and most decisive encounters
among cultures, worlds, religions. The seeds were sown and
the problems of a world-culture began to be dealt with in a
very conscious and serious way. Q!!estions were being asked
    •cr. the masterly chapter by FRIEDRICH BEER,   Europaiscbe Geitescbicbte,   Stuttgart
(W. Kohlhammer) 1953. pp. 280-331.




                                     X Ill
                            PREFACE