made the effort not to lose through their own fault so divine an
espousal? 0 my daughters, how prepared this Lord is to grant
us favors now just as He has granted them to others in the past.
And, in part, He is even more in need that we desire to receive
them, for there are fewer now who care about His honor than
there were then. We love ourselves very much; there's an
extraordinary amount of prudence we use so as not to lose our
rights. 0 what great deception! May the Lord through His
mercy enlighten us so that we do not fall into similar dark­
nesses.
     7. You will ask me or be in doubt concerning two things:
First, if the soul is as ready to do the will of God as was
mentioned,5 how can it be deceived since it doesn't want to do
anything but His will in all? Second, what are the ways in
which the devil can enter so dangerously that your soul goes
astray? For you are so withdrawn from the world, so close to
the sacraments, and in the company, we could say, of angels,
and through the Lord's goodness you have no other desire than
to serve God and please Him in everything. With those who
are already in the midst of worldly occasions such a turn
backward would not be surprising. I say that you are right
about this, for God has granted us a great deal of mercy. But
when I see, as I have said,6 that Judas was in the company of
the apostles and conversing always with God Himself and
listening to His words, I understand that there is no security in
these things.
     8. In answer to the first, I say that if this soul were always
attached to God's will it is clear that it would not go astray. But
the devil comes along with some skillful deception and, under
the color of good, confuses it with regard to little things and
induces it to get taken up with some of them that he makes it
think are good. Then little by little he darkens the intellect,
cools the will's ardor, and makes self-love grow until in one
way or another he withdraws the soul from the will of God and
brings it to his own.
     Thus, we have an answer to the second doubt. There is no
enclosure so fenced in that he cannot enter, or desert so with­
drawn that he fails to go there. And I still have something more
to say: Perhaps the Lord permits this so as to observe the
behavior of that soul He wishes to set up as a light for others. If
                                105
                     TERESA OF AVILA

there is going to be a downfall, it's better that it happen in the
beginning rather than later, when it would be harmful to
many.
     9. The diligence on our part that comes to my mind as
being the most effective is the following. First, we must always
ask God in prayer to sustain us, and very often think that if He
abandons us we will soon end in the abyss, as is true; and we
must never trust in ourselves since it would be foolish to do so.
Then, we should walk with special care and attention, observ­
ing how we are proceeding in the practice of virtue: whether
we are getting better or worse in some area, especially in love
for one another, in the desire to be considered the least among
the Sisters, and in the performance of ordinary tasks. For if we
look out for these things and ask the Lord to enlighten us, we
will soon see the gain or the loss. Don't think that a soul that
comes so close to God is allowed to lose Him so quickly, that
the devil has an easy task. His Majesty would regret the loss of
this soul so much that He gives it in many ways a thousand
interior warnings, so that the harm will not be hidden from it.
     10. Let this, in sum, be the conclusion: that we strive
always to advance. And if we don't advance, let us walk with
great fear. Without doubt the devil wants to cause some lapse,
for it is not possible that after having come so far, one will fail
to grow. Love is never idle, and such a failure would be a very
bad sign. A soul that has tried to be the betrothed of God
Himself, that is now intimate with His Majesty, and has
reached the boundaries that were mentioned must not go to
sleep.
     That you, daughters, may see what He does with those He
now considers to be His betrothed ones, we shall begin to speak
of the sixth dwelling places. And you will see how little it all is
that we can do to serve and suffer and accomplish so as to
dispose ourselves for such great favors. It could be that our
Lord ordained that they command me to write so that we
might forget our little earthly joys and with our eyes set on the
reward, seeing how unmeasurable is His mercy-since He
desires to commune with and reveal Himself to some worms­
and having them fixed also on His grandeur, we may run along
enkindled in His love.
     1 1 . May He be pleased that I manage to explain something

                                1 06
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

about these very difficult things. I know well that this will be
impossible if His Majesty and the Holy Spirit do not move my
pen. And if what I say will not be for your benefit, I beg Him
that I may not succeed in saying anything. His Majesty knows
that I have no other desire, insofar as I can understand myself,
but that His name be praised and that we strive to serve a Lord
who even here on earth pays like this. Through His favors we
can understand something of what He will give us in heaven
without the intervals, trials, and dangers that there are in this
tempestuous sea. If there were no danger of losing or offending
Him, it would be easy to endure life until the end of the world
so as to labor for so great a God and Lord and Spouse.
     May it please His Majesty that we may merit to render
Him some service, without as many faults as we always have,
even in good works, amen.




                               107
      THE SIXTH DWELLING PLACES


                 CONTAINS ELEVEN CHAPTERS




                           CHAPTER ONE
     Discusses how greater trials come when the Lord begins to grant
greater favors. Mentions some and how those who are now in this
dwelling place conduct themselves. This chapter is good for souls under­
going interior trials.
     1 . Well then, let us, with the help of the Holy Spirit, speak
of the sixth dwelling places, where the soul is now wounded
with love for its Spouse and strives for more opportunities to
be alone and, in conformity with its state, to rid itself of
everything that can be an obstacle to this solitude.
     That meeting1 left such an impression that the soul's
whole desire is to enjoy it again. I have already said that in this
prayer nothing is seen in a way that can be called seeing, nor is
anything seen with the imagination. I use the term "meeting"
because of the comparison I made.2 Now the soul is fully
determined to take no other spouse. But the Spouse does not
look at the soul's great desires that the betrothal take place, for
He still wants it to desire this more, and He wants the betroth­
al to take place at a cost; it is the greatest of blessings. And
although everything is small when it comes to paying for this
exceptional benefit, I tell you, daughters, that for the soul to
endure such delay it needs to have that token or pledge of
betrothal that it now has. 0 God help me, what interior and
exterior trials the soul suffers before entering the seventh
dwelling place!


                                  108
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE