8. Since we are so circumspect, everything offends us
because we fear everything; so we don't dare go further-as if
we could reach these dwelling places while leaving to other
persons the trouble of treading the path for us. Since this is not
possible, let us exert ourselves, my Sisters, for the love of the
Lord; let's abandon our reason and our fears into His hands;
let's forget this natural weakness that can take up our attention
so much. Let the prelates take care of our bodily needs; that's
their business. As for ourselves, we should care only about
moving quickly so as to see this Lord. Even though the comfort
you have is little or none at all, we could be deceived by worry
about our health. Furthermore, worry over our health will not
increase our health. This I know. And I also know that the
whole affair doesn't lie in what pertains to the body, for this is
what is the least important. The journey I am speaking of must
be taken with great humility. For if you have understood, it is
in relation to humility, I believe, that there is an obstacle for
those who do not go forward. It should seem to us that we have
gone but a few steps, and we should believe this to be so, and
that those our Sisters have taken are rapid ones; and not only
should we desire but we should strive that they consider us the
most miserable of all.
      9. With humility present, this stage is a most excellent
one. If humility is lacking, we will remain here our whole
life-and with a thousand afflictions and miseries. For since we
will not have abandoned ourselves, this state will be very
laborious and burdensome. We shall be walking while weighed
down with this mud of our human misery, which is not so with
those who ascend to the remaining rooms. But in these rooms
we're speaking of the Lord, as one who is just or even merciful,
does not fail to pay; for He always gives much more than we
deserve by giving us consolations far greater than those we find
in the comforts and distractions of life. But I don't think He
gives much spiritual delight unless sometimes in order to invite
souls by the sight of what takes place in the remaining dwelling
places and so that they will prepare themselves to enter them.
      10. It will seem to you that consolations and spiritual
delights are the same, so why should I make this distinction?
To me it seems there is a very great difference between the
two. Now I can be wrong. I'll say what I understand about this
                                63
                     TERESA OF AVILA

when I speak of the fourth dwelling places, which come after
these. For since something will have to be explained about the
spiritual delights the Lord gives there, the discussion will be
more appropriate at that time. And although the explanation
may seem to be useless it might help somewhat so that in
understanding the nature of each thing you will be able to
strive for what is best. Great solace comes to souls God brings
there, and confusion to those who think they have everything.
If souls are humble they will be moved to give thanks. If there
is some lack in humility, they will feel an inner distaste for
which they will find no reason. For perfection as well as its
reward does not consist in spiritual delights but in greater love
and in deeds done with greater justice and truth.
     1 1 . You will wonder, if this is true-as it is-what use it
serves to explain and treat of these interior favors. I don't
know. Ask him who ordered me to write, for I am not obliged
to dispute with superiors but to obey-nor would disputing
with them be right. What I can truthfully say to you is that at
one time I didn't have or even know about these favors through
experience or think that I would ever in my life know about
them in this way-and rightly so, for it was happiness enough
for me to know, or by conjecture understand, that I was
pleasing God in something. But when I read in books about
these delights and favors the Lord grants souls that serve Him,
I was very much consoled and moved to give great praise to
God. Well, if my soul, which was so wretched, did this, those
souls that are good and humble will praise Him much more.
And if one alone is led to praise Him even once, it is in my
opinion very good that the subject be mentioned so that we
know about the happiness and delight we lose through our own
fault. Moreover, if these favors are from God they come brim­
ming over with love and fortitude by which you can journey
with less labor and grow in the practice of works and virtues.
Don't think that it matters little to lose such favors through our
own fault; when it isn't our fault, the Lord is just.5 His Majesty
will give you through other paths what He keeps from you on
this one because of what He knows, for His secrets are very
hidden; at least what He does will without any doubt be what
is most suitable for us.


                                64
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

     1 2 . What it seems to me would be highly beneficial for
those who through the goodness of the Lord are in this state (for,
as I have said, 6 He grants them no small mercy because they
are very close to ascending higher) is that they study dili­
gently how to be prompt in obedience. And even if they are not
members of a religious order, it would be a great thing for
them to have-as do many persons-someone whom they could
consult so as not to do their own will in anything. Doing our
own will is usually what harms us. And they shouldn't seek
another of their own making, as they say-one who is so
circumspect about everything; but seek out someone who is
very free from illusion about the things of the world. For in
order to know ourselves, it helps a great deal to speak with
someone who already knows the world for what it is. And it
helps also because when we see some things done by others
that seem so impossible for us and the ease with which they do
them, it is very encouraging and seems that through their flight
we also will make bold to fly, as do the bird's fledglings when
they are taught; for even though they do not begin to soar
immediately, little by little they imitate the parent. Receiving
this help is most beneficial; I know. These persons will be
right, however determined they are to keep from offending the
Lord, not to place themselves in the occasion of offending Him.
Since they are close to the first dwelling places, they could
easily return to them. Their fortitude is not founded on solid
ground, as is the case with those who are tried in suffering, for
these latter know about the storms of the world and what little
reason there is to fear them or desire the world's consolations.
But it would be possible for the former in a great persecution
to return to these consolations. The devil knows well how to
stir up tempests so as to do us harm, and these persons would
be unable to bear the trials that would come from their zeal to
prevent others from committing sin.
     13 . Let us look at our own faults and leave aside those of
others, for it is very characteristic of persons with such well­
ordered lives to be shocked by everything. Perhaps we could
truly learn from the one who shocks us what is most important
even though we may surpass him in external composure and
our way of dealing with others. Although good, these latter


                               65
                     TERESA OF AVILA