I truly believe that the devil was trying to gain ground, and in
this instance indeed he was beginning to gain no small amount.
     1 2 . It must be understood that when something is truly
from God there is no languishing in the soul, even though
there may be interior and exterior languishing. The soul expe­
riences deep feelings when it sees itself close to God. Nor does
the experience last ·so long, but for a very short while-al­
though one becomes absorbed again. In such prayer, if the
cause of it is not weakness, as I said, 14 the body is not worn
down nor is any.external feeling produced. For this reason let
them take the advice that when they feel this languishing in
themselves they tell the prioress and distract themselves from it
insofar as they can. The prioress should make them give up so
many hours for prayer so that they have only a very few and
try to get them to sleep and eat well until their natural strength
begins to return, if it has been lost through a lack of food and
sleep. If a Sister's nature is so weak that this is not enough, may
she believe me that God does not want her to practice anything
but the active life, which also must be practiced in monasteries.
They should let her get busy with different duties, and always
take care that she not have a great deal of solitude, for she
would lose her health completely. It will be quite a mortifica­
tion for her; in how she bears this absence is the way the Lord
wants to test her love for Him. And He will be pleased to give
her strength back after some time. If He doesn't, she will gain
through vocal prayer and through obedience and will merit
what she would have merited otherwise, and perhaps more.
      1 3 . There could also be some persons with such weak
heads and imaginations-and I have known some-to whom it
seems that everything they think about they see. This is very
dangerous. Because I shall perhaps treat of it further on, I'll say
no more here. I have greatly enlarged on this dwelling place
because it is the one that more souls enter. Since it is, and since
the natural and the supernatural are joined in it, the devil can
do more harm. In those dwelling places still to be spoken of,
the Lord doesn't give him so much leeway. May His Majesty be
forever praised, amen.




                                84
     THE FIFTH DWELLING PLACES


                  CONTAINS FOUR CHAPTERS




                           CHAPTER ONE
      Begins to deal with how the soul is united to God in prayer. Tells
how one discerns whether there is any illusion.
      1 . 0 Sisters, how can I explain the riches and treasures
and delights found in the fifth dwelling places? I believe it
would be better not to say anything about these remaining
rooms, for there is no way of learning how to speak of them;
neither is the intellect capable of understanding them nor can
comparisons help in explaining them; earthly things are too
coarse for such a purpose.
      Send light from heaven, my Lord, that I might be able to
enlighten these Your servants-for You have been pleased that
some of them ordinarily enjoy these delights-so that they may
not be deceived by the devil transforming himself into an angel
of light. 1 For all their desires are directed toward pleasing You.
      2. And although I have said "some," there are indeed only
a few who fail to enter this dwelling place of which I shall now
speak. There are various degrees, and for that reason I say that
most enter these places. But I believe that only a few will
experience some of the things that I will say are in this room.
Yet even if souls do no more than reach the door, God is being
very merciful to them; although many are called few are cho­
sen. 2 So I say now that all of us who wear this holy habit of
Carmel are called to prayer and contemplation. This call ex­
plains our origin; we are the descendants of men who felt this
call, of those holy fathers on Mount Carmel who in such great
                                   85
                     TERESA OF AVILA

solitude and contempt for the world sought this treasure, this
precious pearl of contemplation that we are speaking about.
Yet few of us dispose ourselves that the Lord may communi­
cate it to us. In exterior matters we are proceeding well so that
we will reach what is necessary; but in the practice of the
virtues that are necessary for arriving at this point we need
very, very much and cannot be careless in either small things
or great. So, my Sisters, since in some way we can enjoy heaven
on earth, be brave in begging the Lord to give us His grace in
such a way that nothing will be lacking through our own fault;
that He show us the way and strengthen the soul that it may
dig until it finds this hidden treasure.3 The truth is that the
treasure lies within our very selves. This is what I would like to
know how to explain, if the Lord would enable me to do so.
     3 . I said "strengthen the soul" so that you will understand
that bodily strength is not necessary for those to whom God
does not give it. He doesn't make it impossible for anyone to
buy His riches. He is content if each one gives what he has.
Blessed be so great a God. But reflect, daughters, that He
doesn't want you to hold on to anything, for if you avoid doing
so you will be able to enjoy the favors we are speaking of.
Whether you have little or much, He wants everything for
Himself; and in conformity with what you know you have
given you will receive greater or lesser favors. There is no
better proof for recognizing whether our prayer has reached
union or not. Don't think this union is some kind of dreamy
state like the one I mentioned before.4 I say "dreamy state"
because it seems that the soul is as though asleep; yet neither
does it really think it is asleep nor does it feel awake. There is
no need here to use any technique to suspend the mind since all
the faculties are asleep in this state-and truly asleep-to the
things of the world and to ourselves. As a matter of fact, during
the time that the union lasts the soul is left as though without
its senses, for it has no power to think even if it wants to. In
loving, if it does love, it doesn't understand how or what it is it
loves or what it would want. In sum, it is like one wpo in every
respect has died to the world so as to live more completely in
God. Thus the death is a delightful one, an uprooting from the
soul of all the operations the latter can have while being in the
body. The death is a delightful one because in truth it seems
                                86
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE