that I think, and I believe truly, that somehow it would be
more possible for a person with very good hearing not to hear
someone else speaking in a loud voice. In this latter instance
the person would be able to turn his attention away and center
his mind and intellect on something else. But in the locution we
are speaking about this cannot be done; there are no ears to
stop, nor is there the power to think of anything but what is
said to the soul. For He who was able to stop the sun (through
Joshua's prayer, I believe) l6 can make the faculties and the
whole interior stop in such a way that the soul sees clearly that
another greater Lord than itself governs that castle. And this
brings it deep devotion and humility. So there's no remedy for
this kind of locution. May the divine Majesty provide a remedy
that will enable us to place our eyes only on pleasing Him and
to be forgetful of ourselves, as I said, amen.
     Please God that I may have succeeded in explaining what I
set out to; may it be helpful for whoever has had such experi­
ence.

                          CHAPTER FOUR
      Treats of when God suspends the soul in prayer with rapture or
ecstasy or transport, which are all the same in my opinion, 1 and how
great courage is necessary to receive sublime favors from His Majesty.
      1 . With these trials and the other things that were men­
tioned, what kind of calm can the poor little butterfly have? All
these sufferings are meant to increase one's desire to enjoy the
Spouse. And His Majesty, as one who knows our weakness, is
enabling the soul through these afflictions and many others to
have the courage to be joined with so great a Lord and to take
Him as its Spouse. 2
      2. You will laugh at my saying this and will think it's
foolishness; it will seem to any one of you that such courage is
unnecessary and that there's no woman so miserable who
wouldn't have the courage to be married to the king. I believe
this is true with respect to kings here on earth; but with respect
to the King of heaven, I tell you there is need for more courage
than you think. Our nature is very timid and lowly when it
comes to something so great, and I am certain that if God were
not to give the courage, no matter how much you might see
                                 1 26
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

that the favor is good for us, it would be impossible for you to
receive that favor. And thus you will see what His Majesty
does to conclude this betrothal, which I understand must be
established when He gives the soul raptures that draw it out of
its senses. For if it were to see itself so near this great majesty
while in its senses, it would perhaps die. Let it be understood
that I mean true raptures and not the weaknesses women
experience here below, for everything seems to us to be a
rapture or an ecstasy. And, as I believe I have said,3 some have
constitutions so weak that the prayer of quiet is enough to
make them die.
      I want to put down here some kinds of rapture that I've
come to understand because I've discussed them with so many
spiritual persons. But I don't know whether I shall succeed as I
did when I wrote elsewhere about them4 and other things that
occur in this dwelling place. On account of certain reasons it
seems worthwhile to speak of these kinds of rapture again-if
for no other reason, so that everything related to these dwelling
places will be put down here together.
      3 . One kind of rapture is that in which the soul even
though not in prayer is touched by some word it remembers or
hears about God. It seems that His Majesty from the interior of
the soul makes the spark we mentioned5 increase, for He is
moved with compassion in seeing the soul suffer so long a time
from its desire. All burnt up, the soul is renewed like the
phoenix, and one can devoutly believe that its faults are par­
doned. Now that it is so pure, the Lord joins it with Himself,
without anyone understanding what is happening except these
two; nor does the soul itself understand in a way that can
afterward be explained. Yet, it does have interior understand­
ing, for this experience is not like that of fainting or convul­
sion; in these latter nothing is understood inwardly or out­
wardly.
     4. What I know in this case is that the soul was never so
awake to the things of God nor did it have such deep enlighten­
ment and knowledge of His Majesty. This will seem impossi­
ble, for if the faculties are so absorbed that we can say they are
dead, and likewise the senses, how can a soul know that it
understands this secret? I don't know, nor perhaps does any
creature but only the Creator. And this goes for many other
                                127
                     TERESA OF AVILA

things that take place in this state-1 mean in these two dwell­
ing places, for there is no closed door between the one and the
other. Because there are things in the last that are not revealed
to those who have not yet reached it, I thought I should divide
them.
     5. When the soul is in this suspension, the Lord likes to
show it some secrets, things about heaven, and imaginative
visions. It is able to tell of them afterward, for these remain so
impressed on the memory that they are never forgotten. But
when the visions are intellectual, the soul doesn't know how to
speak of them. For there must be some visions during these
moments that are so sublime that it's not fitting for those who
live on this earth to have the further understanding necessary
to explain them. However, since the soul is in possession of its
senses, it can say many things about these intellectual visions.
     It could be that some of you do not know what a vision is,
especially an intellectual one. I shall explain at the proper
time,6 for one who has the authority ordered me to do so.7 And
although the explanation may not seem pertinent, it will per­
haps benefit some souls.
     6. Well now you will ask me: If afterward there is to be no
remembrance of these sublime favors granted by the Lord to
the soul in this state, what benefit do they have? 0 daughters,
they are so great one cannot exaggerate! For even though they
are unexplainable, they are well inscribed in the very interior
part of the soul and are never forgotten.
     But, you will insist, if there is no image and the faculties
do not understand, how can the visions be remembered? I don't
understand this either; but I do understand that some truths
about the grandeur of God remain so fixed in this soul that
even if faith were not to tell it who God is and of its obligation
to believe that He is God, from that very moment it would
adore Him as God, as did Jacob when he saw the ladder. By
means of the ladder Jacob must have understood other secrets
that he didn't know how to explain, for by seeing just a ladder
on which angels descended and ascended he would not have
understood such great mysteries if there had not been deeper
interior enlightenment.8 I don't know if I'm guessing right in
what I say, for although I have heard this story about Jacob, I
don't know if I'm remembering it correctly.
                                128
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE