THE IMAGE OF A CASTLE
     The Interior Castle has come to be regarded as Teresa's best
synthesis. In it the spiritual doctrine is presented through the
unifying outline of seven dwelling places among which there is
a division into two sections. The first three groups of dwelling
places speak of what is achievable through human efforts and
the ordinary help of grace. The remaining four groups deal
with the passive, or mystical, elements of the spiritual life.
     The question has been raised, as one would expect among
academics, as to how Teresa conceived the notion of using the
castle as a symbol for the interior life. What she reveals leaves
room for interpretation: "Today while beseeching our Lord to
                               19
                       INTRODUCTION

speak for me because I wasn't able to think of anything to say,
nor did I know how to begin to carry out this obedience, there
came to my mind what I shall now speak about, that which will
provide us with a basis to begin with. It is that we consider our
soul to be like a castle made entirely out of a diamond or of
very clear crystal, in which there are many rooms, just as in
heaven there are many dwelling places."59 Previously, in The
Way of Perfection, with similar thoughts, Teresa had advised:
"Well, let us imagine that within us is an extremely rich palace,
built entirely of gold and precious stones; in sum, built for a
Lord such as this . . . . Imagine, also, that in this palace dwells
this mighty King."60
     In an interesting account, one of her early biographers, Fr.
Diego de Yepes, testifies that Teresa told him that on the eve of
Trinity Sunday, 1 577, God showed her in a flash the whole
book. There was "a most beautiful crystal globe like a castle in
which she saw seven dwelling places, and in the seventh, which
was in the center, the King of Glory dwelt in the greatest
splendor. From there He beautified and illumined all those
dwelling places to the outer wall. The inhabitants received
more light the nearer they were to the center. Outside of the
castle all was darkness, with toads, vipers, and other poisonous
vermin. While she was admiring this beauty, which the grace
of God communicates to souls, the light suddenly disappeared
and, although the King of Glory did not leave the castle, the
crystal was covered with darkness and was left as ugly as coal
and with an unbearable stench, and the poisonous creatures
outside the wall were able to get into the castle. Such was the
state of a soul in sin."61 This was told to Yepes, a former
confessor of Teresa's, when she met him by chance one snowy
day in an inn in Arevalo either in 1 579 or 1 580. Yepes also adds
with a certain self-satisfaction that "although in the Book of Her
Life and the Dwelling Places she mentions this, she doesn't in
either of them communicate this vision as specifically as she
did to me."62 But if this vision came to Teresa in 1 577, we are
left wondering both how she could have referred to it in her
Life, written in the 1 560s, and about the value of Diego de
Yepes' testimony. Nonetheless, Teresa's vague expression
"there came to my mind" (se me ofreci6) does not rule out the
possibility of a vision as the basis of her symbol.
                                 20
                      INTRODUCTION

     As described in her Life, she once did receive a mystical
vision of God's presence and what it is for a soul to be in
mortal sin: "Once while I was reciting with all the Sisters the
hours of the Divine Office, my soul suddenly became recollect­
ed; and it seemed to me to be like a brightly polished mirror,
without any part on the back or sides or top or bottom that
wasn't totally clear. In its center Christ, our Lord, was shown
to me . . . I was given understanding of what it is for a soul to
be in mortal sin. It amounts to clouding this mirror with mist
and leaving it black; and thus this Lord cannot be revealed or
seen even though He is always present giving us being."63
Later in the same chapter it seems from her reference that this
experience influenced her thinking when she compares the
Divinity to a very clear diamond in which everything is visible
including sin with all its ugliness. 64
     Whatever the speculation on matters like the above, the
point must be made that the Interior Castle is principally the
fruit of her own experience, and though Teresa makes the
effort to hide her identity by referring to this other person she
knows, her talents for concealing the identity were abysmally
poor.


                        THE SYNTHESIS
     Although the outer wall of the castle (the body) is plain, it
nonetheless may lure the soul's attention from the inner bril­
liant castle.65 Inside the castle are many dwelling places, above,
below, and to the sides. In other words, the spiritual life that
goes on within the castle is a complex matter involving the
individual's capacities, the diversity of ways, and spiritual
depths. In speaking of the seven dwelling places, we must keep
in mind that "in each of these are many ·others, below and
above and to the sides, with lovely gardens and fountains and
labyrinths, such delightful things that you would want to be
dissolved in praises of the great God who created the soul in
His own image and likeness."66 At the center of the castle is
God's dwelling place.
     The gate of entry is prayer.67 Prayer is a door that opens
up into the mystery of God and at the same time a means of
communing with Him. It actuates the personal relationship
                                21
                        INTRODUCTION