things are not what is most important; nor is there any reason
to desire that everyone follow at once our own path, or to set
about teaching the way of the spirit to someone who perhaps
doesn't know what such a thing is. For with these desires that
God gives us, Sisters, about the good of souls, we can make
many mistakes. So it is better to carry out what our rule says,
to strive to live always in silence and hope,7 for the Lord will
take care of these souls. If we ourselves are not negligent in
beseeching His Majesty to do so, we shall, with His favor, do
much good. May He be blessed forever.




                               66
   THE FOURTH DWELLING PLACES


                  CONTAINS THREE CHAPTERS




                           CHAPTER ONE
     Discusses the difference between consolations (orfeelings of tender­
ness) in prayer and spiritual delights. 1 Tells of her happiness on
learning the difference between the mind and the intellect. This knowl­
edge is very beneficial for anyone who is greatly distracted in prayer.
      1 . In order to begin to speak of the fourth dwelling places
I really need to entrust myself, as I've already done, to the Holy
Spirit and beg Him to speak for me from here on that I may say
something about the remaining rooms in a way that you will
understand. For supernatural experiences begin here. These
are something most difficult to explain, if His Majesty doesn't
do so, as was said in another book I wrote fourteen years ago,
more or less, in which I dealt with these experiences to the
extent of my knowledge of them at that time. Although I think
I now have a little more light about these favors the Lord
grants to some souls, knowing how to explain them is a differ­
ent matter.2 May His Majesty help me to do so if it will be of
some benefit; and if not, then no.
     2. Since these dwelling places now are closer to where the
King is, their beauty is great. There are things to see and
understand so delicate that the intellect is incapable of devising
a way to explain them, although something might turn out to
be well put and not at all obscure to the unexperienced; and
anyone who has experience, especially when there is a lot of
it, will understand very well.
     It will seem that to reach these dwelling places one will
                                   67
                     TERESA OF AVILA

have had to live in the others a long while. Although it is usual
that a person will have to have stayed in those already spoken
about, there is no certain rule, as you will have often heard. For
the Lord gives when He desires, as He desires, and to whom
He desires. Since these blessings belong to Him, He does no
injustice to anyone.3
     3. Poisonous creatures rarely enter these dwelling places.
If they enter they do no harm; rather, they are the occasion of
gain. I hold that the situation is much better in this stage of
prayer when these creatures do enter and wage war, for the
devil could deceive one with respect to the spiritual delights
given by God if there were no temptations, and do much more
harm than when temptations are felt. The soul would not gain
so much; at least all the things contributing to its merit would
be removed, and it would be left in a habitual absorption. For
when a soul is in one continual state, I don't consider it safe,
nor do I think it is possible for the spirit of the Lord to be in
one fixed state during this exile.
     4. Well now, in speaking about what I said I'd mention
here4 concerning the difference in prayer between consolations
and spiritual delights, the term "consolations," I think, can be
given to those experiences we ourselves acquire through our
own meditation and petitions to the Lord, those that proceed
from our own nature-although God in the end does have a
hand in them; for it must be understood, in whatever I say, that
without Him we can do nothing. 5 But these consolations arise
from the virtuous work itself that we perform, and it seems
that we have earned them through our own effort and are
rightly consoled for having engaged in such deeds. But if we
reflect on this, we see that we experience the same joyful
consolations in many of the things that can happen to us on
earth, for example: when someone suddenly inherits a great
fortune; when we suddenly see a person we love very much;
when we succeed in a large and important business matter and
of which all speak well; when you see your husband or brother
or son alive after someone has told you he is dead. I have seen
the flow of tears from great consolations, and this has even
happened to me at times. I think that just as these joyful
consolations are natural so are those afforded us by the things
of God, but these latter are of a nobler kind, although the
                                68
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

others are not bad. In sum, joyful consolations in prayer have
their beginning in our own human nature and their end in
God.
     The spiritual delights begin in God, but human nature
feels and enjoys them as much as it does those I mentioned­
and much more. 0 Jesus, how I long to know how to explain
this! For I discern, I think, a very recognizable difference, but I
don't have the knowledge to be able to explain myself. May the
Lord do so.
      5. Now I remember a line that we say at Prime, in the
latter part of the verse at the end of the last psalm: Cum dilatasti
cor meum.6 For anyone who has had much experience these
words are sufficient to see the difference between consolations
and spiritual delights; for anyone who has not, more words are
needed. The consolations that were mentioned do not expand
the heart; rather, they usually seem to constrain it a little­
although there is the greatest consolation at seeing what is done
for God. But some anxious tears come that in a way, it seems,
are brought on by the passions. I don't know much about these
passions of the soul-knowledge of them might perhaps have
enabled me to explain-and what proceeds from sensuality and
from our human nature, for I am very dull. If only I knew how
to explain myself, for since I have undergone this I understand
it. Knowledge and learning are a great help in everything.
     6. My experience of this state (I mean of this joy and
consolation that comes during meditation) is that if I began to
weep over the Passion I didn't know how to stop until I got a
severe headache; if I did so over my sins, the same thing
happened. Our Lord granted me quite a favor. Yet I don't want
to examine now whether the one or the other is better, but I
would like to know how to explain the difference there is
between the one and the other. It is for these reasons some­
times that these tears flow and desires come, and they are
furthered by human nature and one's temperament; but final­
ly, as I have said,7 they end in God regardless of their nature.
They are to be esteemed if there is the humility to understand
that one is no better because of experiencing them, for it
cannot be known whether they are all effects of love. When
they are, the gift is God's.
     For the most part, the souls in the previous dwelling places
                                 69
                      TERESA OF AVILA