help but fear when they recall some of those persons Scripture
mentions who, it seems, were favored by the Lord, like Solo­
mon, who communed so much with His Majesty, as I have
said.2 The one among you who feels safest should fear more,
for blessed is the man who fears the Lord,3 says David. May His
Majesty protect us always. To beseech Him that we not offend
Him is the greatest security we can have. May He be praised
forever, amen.
     4. It will be good, Sisters, to tell you the reason the Lord
grants so many favors in this world. Although, if you have paid
attention, you will have understood this in learning of their
effects, I want to tell you again here lest someone think that the
reason is solely for the sake of giving delight to these souls; that
thought would be a serious error. His Majesty couldn't grant
us a greater favor than to give us a life that would be an
imitation of the life His beloved Son lived. Thus I hold for
certain that these favors are meant to fortify our weakness, as I
have said here at times,4 that we may be able to imitate Him in
His great sufferings.
     5. We have always seen that those who were closest to
Christ our Lord were those with the greatest trials. Let us look
at what His glorious Mother suffered and the glorious apostles.
How do you think Saint Paul could have suffered such very
great trials? Through him we can see the effects visions and
contemplation produce when from our Lord, and not from the
imagination or the devil's deceit. Did Saint Paul by chance hide
himself in the enjoyment of these delights and not engage in
anything else? You already see that he didn't have a day of rest,
from what we can understand, and neither did he have any rest
at night since it was then that he earned his livelihood. 5 I like
very much the account about Saint Peter's fleeing from prison
and how our Lord appeared to him and told him "I am on my
way to Rome to be crucified again." We never recite the office
of this feast, where this account is, that I don't find particular
consolation.6 How did this favor from the Lord impress Saint
Peter or what did he do? He went straight to his death. And it
was no small mercy from the Lord that Peter found someone to
provide him with death.
     6. 0 my Sisters! How forgetful this soul, in which the
Lord dwells in so particular a way, should be of its own rest,
                                1 89
                      TERESA OF AVILA

how little it should care for its honor, and how far it should be
from wanting esteem in anything! For if it is with Him very
much, as is right, it should think little about itself. All its
concern is taken up with how to please Him more and how or
where it will show Him the love it bears Him. This is the
reason for prayer, my daughters, the purpose of this spiritual
marriage: the birth always of good works, good works.
     7. This is the true sign of a thing, or favor, being from
God, as I have already told you. 7 It benefits me little to be alone
making acts of devotion to our Lord, proposing and promising
to do wonders in His service, if I then go away and when the
occasion offers itself do everything the opposite. I was wrong
in saying it profits little, for everything having to do with God
profits a great deal. And even though we are weak and do not
carry out these resolutions afterward, sometimes His Majesty
will give us the power to do so, even though, perhaps, doing so
is burdensome to us, as is often true. Since He sees that a soul is
very fainthearted He gives it a severe trial, truly against its
will, and brings this soul out of the trial with profit. After­
ward, since the soul understands this, the fear lessens and one
can offer oneself more willingly to Him. I meant "it benefits
me little" in comparison with how much greater the benefit is
when our deeds conform with what we say in prayer; what
cannot be done all at once can be done little by little. Let the
soul bend its will if it wishes that prayer be beneficial to it, for
within the corners of these little monasteries there will not be
lacking many occasions for you to do so. 8
     8. Keep in mind that I could not exaggerate the impor­
tance of this. Fix your eyes on the Crucified and everything
will become small for you. If His Majesty showed us His love
by means of such works and frightful torments, how is it that
you want to please Him only with words? Do you know what
it means to be truly spiritual? It means becoming the slaves of
God. Marked with His brand, which is that of the cross,
spiritual persons, because now they have given Him their
liberty, can be sold by Him as slaves of everyone, as He was.
He doesn't thereby do them any harm or grant them a small
favor. And if souls aren't determined about becoming His
slave, let them be convinced that they are not making much
progress, for this whole building, as I have said,9 has humility
                                 190
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE