7. What I understand to be most fitting for the soul the
Lord has desired to put in this dwelling place is that which has
been said.8 And without any effort or noise the soul should
strive to cut down the rambling of the intellect-but not sus­
pend either it or the mind; it is good to be aware of who God is
and that one is in God's presence. If what it feels within itself
absorbs it, well and good. But let it not strive to understand the
nature of this recollection, for this recollection is given to the
 will. Let the soul enjoy it without any endeavors other than
some loving words, for even though we may not try in this
prayer to go without thinking of anything, I know that often
 the intellect will be suspended, even though for only a very
brief moment.
      8. But as I said elsewhere, 9 the reason why in this kind of
prayer, that is, the kind that is like the flowing spring in which
the water does not come through aqueducts, the soul restrains
itself or is restrained in its realization that it doesn't understand
what it desires; and so the mind wanders from one extreme to
the other, like a fool unable to rest in anything. (I am referring
to the kind of prayer this dwelling place began with, for I have
joined the prayer of recollection, which I should have men­
tioned first, with this one. The prayer of recollection is much
less intense than the prayer of spiritual delight from God that I
mentioned; but it is the beginning through which one goes to
the other, for in the prayer of recollection meditation, or the
work of the intellect, must not be set aside.) The will has such
deep rest in its God that the clamor of the intellect is a terrible
bother to it. There is no need to pay any attention to this
clamor, for doing so would make the will lose much of what it
enjoys. But one should let the intellect go and surrender one­
self into the arms of love, for His Majesty will teach the soul
what it must do at that point. Almost everything lies in finding
oneself unworthy of so great a good and in being occupied with
giving thanks.
      9. In order to deal with the prayer of recollection I post­
poned mention of the effects or signs in souls to whom God,
our Lord, gives this prayer of quiet. What an expansion or
dilation of the soul is may be clearly understood from the
example of a fount whose water doesn't overflow into a stream
because the fount itself is constructed of such material that the
                                 81
                     TERESA OF AVILA

more water there is flowing into it the larger the trough
becomes. So it seems is the case with this prayer and with
many other marvels that God grants to the soul, for He enables
and prepares it so that it can keep everything within itself.
Hence this interior sweetness and expansion can be verified in
the fact that the soul is not as tied down as it was before in
things pertaining to the service of God, but has much more
freedom. Thus, in not being constrained by the fear of hell (be­
cause although there is even greater fear of offending God, it
loses servile fear here), this soul is left with great confidence
that it will enjoy Him. The fear it used to have of doing pen­
ance and losing its health has disappeared, and it now thinks it
will be able to do all things in God 1 0 and has greater desire for
penance than previously. The fear it used to have of trials it
now sees to be tempered. Its faith is more alive; it knows that if
it suffers trials for God, His Majesty will give it the grace to
suffer them with patience. Sometimes it even desires them be­
cause there also remains a strong will to do something for God.
Since its knowledge of God's grandeur grows, it considers itself
to be more miserable. Because it has already experienced spiri­
tual delight from God, it sees that worldly delights are like
filth. It finds itself withdrawing from them little by little, and
it is more master of itself for so doing. In sum, there is an im­
provement in all the virtues. It will continue to grow if it
doesn't turn back now to offending God; because if it does,
then everything will be lost however high on the summit the
soul may be. Nor should it be understood that if God grants
this favor once or twice to a soul all these good effects will be
caused. It must persevere in receiving them, for in this perse­
verance lies all our good.
      10. One strong warning I give to whoever finds himself in
this state is that he guard very carefully against placing himself
in the occasion of offending God. In this prayer the soul is not
yet grown but is like a suckling child. If it turns away from its
mother's breasts, what can be expected for it but death? I am
very much afraid that this will happen to anyone to whom God
has granted this favor and who withdraws from prayer-unless
he does so for a particularly special reason-or if he doesn't
return quickly to prayer, for he will go from bad to worse. I
know there is a great deal to fear in this matter. And I know
                                82
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

some persons for whom I have felt quite sorry-and I've seen
what I'm speaking about-because they have turned away from
one who with so much love wanted to be their friend and
proved it by deeds. I advise them so strongly not to place
themselves in the occasions of sin because the devil tries much
harder for a soul of this kind than for very many to whom the
Lord does not grant these favors. For such a soul can be of
great benefit to God's Church and do a great deal of harm to
the devil by getting others to follow it. And even though the
devil may have no other reason than to see who it is to whom
His Majesty shows particular love, that's sufficient for him to
wear himself out trying to lead the soul to perdition. So these
souls suffer much combat and if they go astray they do so much
more than others.
     You, Sisters, are free of dangers, from what we can know.
From pride and vainglory may God deliver you. If the devil
should counterfeit God's favors, this will be known by the fact
that these good effects are not caused, but just the opposite.
     1 1 . There is one danger I want to warn you about (al­
though I may have mentioned it elsewhere) l 1 into which I have
seen persons of prayer fall, especially women, for since we are
weaker there is more occasion for what I'm about to say. It is
that some have a weak constitution because of a great amount
of penance, prayer, and keeping vigil, and even without these;
in receiving some favor, their nature is overcome. Since they
feel some consolation interiorly and a languishing and weak­
ness exteriorly, they think they are experiencing a spiritual
sleep (which is a prayer a little more intense than the prayer of
quiet)12 and they let themselves become absorbed. The more
they allow this, the more absorbed they become because their
nature is further weakened, and they fancy that they are being
carried away in rapture. I call it being carried away in foolish­
ness13 because it amounts to nothing more than wasting time
and wearing down one's health. These persons feel nothing
through their senses nor do they feel anything concerning
God. One person happened to remain eight hours in this state.
By sleeping and eating and avoiding so much penance, this
person got rid of the stupor, for there was someone who
understood her. She had misled both her confessor and other
persons, as well as herself-for she hadn't intended to deceive.
                               83
                     TERESA OF AVILA