ceived her terrifying vision of hell, 1 1 the result of which was
her determination to live the Carmelite rule with greater per­
fection, which in turn led to another mission: the founding of a
new manner of contemplative life within the Church. Her new
way of life began with the first monastery of Saint Joseph in
Avila in 1 562. She tells the story of this foundation in chapters
3 2-36 of the final draft of her Life.
     The nuns who joined Teresa in this new Carmel soon
began to feel keenly their need for more doctrine and practical
instruction about the life of prayer. In response to this need,
Teresa began another work in 1 565; this later became known as
The Way of Perfection.
     In establishing her new foundation, Teresa's goals were
modest: a small community with eleven nuns (in contrast to the
1 80 living in the Incarnation), who would dedicate themselves
seriously to the contemplative life according to the Carmelite
rule, observing in particular its spirit of unceasing prayer.
     In the years following this first foundation, Teresa became
aware of a new meaning and purpose in what she had begun,
and, consequently, she felt the growing desire to found other
similar Carmels. News of the conflicts tearing the Church in
Northern Europe and of the millions of souls living in the
Indies as yet to be evangelized set the fires of love and zeal that
were already a spiritual torment to her burning even more
intensely. 12 Teresa felt that since Christ has so few friends,
these must be good ones. Through their intimacy with Him,
they can be of service to the Church in the mission of defend­
ing and spreading the faith of Jesus Christ, to whom she
referred throughout her writings as "His Majesty." 13 A visit to
Spain in 1 567 from Father Rubeo, the general of the Carmelite
order, provided an answer to Teresa's deepest longings. A
spiritual man with high goals for the order, the general was
impressed both by Teresa and by what he saw at Saint Jo­
seph's. He gave her orders to found as many of these contem­
plative monasteries as she could, and he also gave her permis­
sion to found monasteries of the same kind of life for the friars.
In response to this latter permission, she arranged to meet
Saint John of the Cross and convinced him to join her in this
work.


                                 4
                     INTRODUCTION

      A number of new Carmels were founded in the following
years, and Teresa describes their beginnings in The Book of
Foundations. By the time of her death in 1 582, she had founded
fourteen monasteries. But these foundations were not made
easily. All along the way she met with incredible problems and
misunderstandings that gave scope to her marvelous human
qualities and talents by which she attracted many to God, and
this not only in her own age but through the years and even
centuries into the present time. She once wrote in regard to
those who think that to be perfect they must live rigidly that
such constraint "will not bring many souls to God, because
they will see so much repression and tenseness. Our nature is
such that this constraint is frightening and oppressive to oth­
ers, and they flee from following the road that you are taking,
even though they know clearly that it is the more virtuous
path."14
     Her new mission meant travel throughout Spain, to large
cities and small towns; it meant acquaintanceship with the
poor and unlettered as well as with the nobility, with those
who walk in high society, anxious for their social positions and
honor. The list of those she had to deal with is a long one: the
king (Philip II), the apostolic nuncios, bishops, the general,
provincials, university professors, inquisitors of the Spanish
Inquisition, missionaries and country priests, princes and prin­
cesses, dukes and duchesses, counts and countesses, merchants
and bankers, builders and carpenters, mule drivers and inn­
keepers. In Spain's golden age, a time during which that once
remote peninsula had become ruler of the largest empire the
world had yet seen, she found herself involved in the most
varied affairs: differences between the king and the family of
the Duke of Alba; threats of war between Spain and Portugal;
litigations in her own family; clashes between the Castilian and
Andalusian temperament, and between conflicting commands
from the royal government and Rome.
     Her enormous correspondence kept her up at times until
two or three in the morning despite the obligation of rising
again at five to be in choir with her community. In a letter to
her brother Lorenzo, she wrote: "On that day I had so much
correspondence and business to attend to that I was writing till


                               5
                       INTRODUCTION

two in the morning, and this gave me a dreadful headache. But
I think it happened for the best since the doctor has told me I
must never write after midnight and I am not always to do the
writing myself."15
      Amid all the tangled complexities into which she was
hurled by her mission, Teresa demonstrated a unique quality
of ardor, a capacity to win others to her cause through human
warmth and motherly charm, openness and joy in readiness to
suffer for God what must be suffered: the wretched health with
its severe fevers, the terrible roads and traveling conditions, the
disappointments of unfulfilled promises, harsh contradictions,
serious misunderstandings, and hostile opposition to her mon­
asteries. Through letters or, whenever possible, through per­
sonal contact, she tried to explain her work in love and humil­
ity to whoever she heard was opposed. In the end, worn out
from the fatigue caused by her last foundation at Burgos in
1 582, she nonetheless forced herself to obey a difficult order
given by Fr. Antonio de Jesus to undertake a journey that had
no spiritual purpose save merely to satisfy the desires of the
Duchess of Alba. Arriving in the little city of Alba and emptied
of all strength, she died in her small Carmelite cell, October 4,
1 582, repeating some verses from The Song of Songs and
thanking God that she had been a daughter of the Church.

              TERESA'S MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE
     In the midst of the fascinating and unusual exterior events
surrounding her work of establishing new Carmels, there was
taking place within Teresa an event even more fascinating and
unusual: a mystical journey into a more intimate understand­
ing of the Christian mysteries. Throughout her various writ­
ings, Teresa traces both her outward travels and, even more
explicitly, her inward journey.
     Her mystical experience began with a feeling of the pres­
ence of God that "would come upon me unexpectedly so that I
could in no way doubt He was within me or I totally immersed
in Him."16 This presence of God so manifested itself to Teresa
as she went on that the doctrine of God's omnipresence became
an essential element of her teaching on the spiritual life. The
seemingly obvious truth that God is in things and, above all, in
                                 6
                       INTRODUCTION