to join our little labors with the great ones He suffered so that
all the work may become one.
     6. Therefore, courage, my daughters! Let's be quick to do
this work and weave this little cocoon by taking away our self足
love and self-will, our attachment to any earthly thing, and by
performing deeds of penance, prayer, mortification, obedience,
and of all the other things you know. Would to heaven that we
would do what we know we must; and we are instructed about
what we must do. Let it die; let this silkworm die, as it does in
completing what it was created to do! And you will see how we
see God, as well as ourselves placed inside His grandeur, as is
this little silkworm within its cocoon. Keep in mind that I say
"see God," in the sense of what I mentioned4 concerning that
which is felt in this kind of union.
      7. Now, then, let's see what this silkworm does, for that's
the reason I've said everything else. When the soul is, in this
prayer, truly dead to the world, a little white butterfly comes
forth. 0 greatness of God! How transformed the soul is when
it comes out of this prayer after having been placed within the
greatness of God and so closely joined with Him for a little
while-in my opinion the union never lasts for as much as a
half hour. Truly, I tell you that the soul doesn't recognize
itself. Look at the difference there is between an ugly worm
and a little white butterfly; that's what the difference is here.
The soul doesn't know how it could have merited so much
good-from where this good may have come I mean, for it well
knows that it doesn't merit this blessing. It sees within itself a
desire to praise the Lord; it would want to dissolve and die a
thousand deaths for Him. It soon begins to experience a desire
to suffer great trials without its being able to do otherwise.
There are the strongest desires for penance, for solitude, and
that all might know God; and great pain comes to it when it
sees that He is offended. I shall treat of these things more
particularly in the next dwelling place;5 although what is in
this dwelling place and the next are almost identical, the force
of the effects is very different. As I have said,6 if after God
brings a soul here it makes the effort to advance, it will see
great things.
      8. Oh, now, to see the restlessness of this little butterfly,
even though it has never been quieter and calmer in its life, is
                                93
                      TERESA OF AVILA

something to praise God for! And the difficulty is that it
doesn't know where to alight and rest. Since it has experienced
such wonderful rest, all that it sees on earth displeases it,
especially if God gives it this wine often. Almost each time it
gains new treasures. It no longer has any esteem for the works
it did while a worm, which was to weave the cocoon little by
little; it now has wings. How can it be happy walking step by
step when it can fly? On account of its desires, everything it
can do for God becomes little in its own eyes. It doesn't
wonder as much at what the saints suffered now that it under足
stands through experience how the Lord helps and transforms
a soul, for it doesn't recognize itself or its image. The weakness
it previously seemed to have with regard to doing penance it
now finds is its strength. Its attachment to relatives or friends
or wealth (for neither its actions, nor its determination, nor its
desire to withdraw were enough; rather, in its opinion, it was
more attached to everything) is now so looked upon that it
grieves when obliged to do what is necessary in this regard so
as not to offend God. Everything wearies it, for it has learned
through experience that creatures cannot give it true rest.
      9. It seems I have been lengthy, but I could say much
more; and whoever has received this favor from God will see
that I've been brief. So, there is no reason to be surprised that
this little butterfly seeks rest again since it feels estranged from
earthly things. Well then, where will the poor little thing go? It
can't return to where it came from; as was said,' we are
powerless, however much we do, to bring about this favor until
God is again pleased to grant it. 0 Lord, what new trials begin
for this soul! Who would say such a thing after a favor so
sublime? Briefly, in one way or another there must be a cross
while we live, and with respect to anyone who says that after
he arrived here he always enjoyed rest and delight I would say
that he never arrived but that perhaps he had experienced some
spiritual delight-if he had entered into the previous dwelling
places and his experiences had been helped along by natural
weakness or perhaps even by the devil who gives him peace so
 as afterward to wage much greater war against him.
       10. I don't mean to say that those who arrive here do not
 have peace; they do have it, and it is very deep. For the trials
themselves are so valuable and have such good roots that al-
                                 94
                   THE INTERIOR CASTLE

though very severe they give rise to peace and happiness. From
the very unhappiness caused by worldly things arises the ever
so painful desire to leave this world. Any relief the soul has
comes from the thought that God wants it to be living in this
exile; yet even this is not enough, because in spite of all these
benefits it is not entirely surrendered to God's will, as will be
seen further on8-although it doesn't fail to conform itself. But
it conforms with a great feeling that it can do no more because
no more has been given it, and with many tears. Every time it
is in prayer this regret is its pain. In some way perhaps the
sorrow proceeds from the deep pain it feels at seeing that God
is offended and little esteemed in this world and that many
souls are lost, heretics as well as Moors; although those that
grieve it most are Christians. Even though it sees that God's
mercy is great-for, however wicked their lives, these Chris足
tians can make amends and be saved-it fears that many are
being condemned.
      1 1 . 0 greatness of God! A few years ago--a nd even per足
haps days-this soul wasn't mindful of anything but itself.
Who has placed it in the midst of such painful concerns? Even
were we to meditate for many years we wouldn't be able to feel
them as painfully as does this soul now. Well, God help me,
wouldn't it be enough if for many days and years I strove to
think about the tremendous evil of an offense against God and
that those souls who are condemned are His children and my
brothers and about the dangers in which we live and how good
it is for us to leave this miserable life? Not at all, daughters; the
grief that is felt here is not like that of this world. We can, with
God's favor, feel the grief that comes from thinking about these
things a great deal, but such grief doesn't reach the intimate
depths of our being as does the pain suffered in this state, for it
seems that the pain breaks and grinds the soul into pieces,
without the soul's striving for it or even at times wanting it.
Well, what is this pain? Where does it come from? I shall tell
you.
      1 2 . Haven't you heard it said of the bride-for I have
already mentioned it elsewhere here but not in this sense9-that
God brought her into the inner wine cellar and put charity in
order within her? 10 Well, that is what I mean. Since that soul
now surrenders itself into His hands and its great love makes it

                                 95
                     TERESA OF AVILA