learned and the effects mentioned are present. But if he says so,
I know that the Lord Himself who walks with you will console
you, assure you, and give the confessor light that he may give it
to you.
      9. If the confessor is a person whom, although he practices
prayer, the Lord has not led by this path, he will at once be
frightened and condemn it. For this reason I advise you to have
a confessor who is very learned and, if possible, also spiritual.
The prioress should give permission for such consultation.
Even though, judging by the good life you live, you may be
walking securely, the prioress will be obligated to have you
speak with a confessor so that both you and she may walk
securely. And once you have spoken with these persons, be
quiet and don't try to confer about the matter with others; at
times the devil causes some fears so excessive that they force
the soul, without its having anything really to fear, not to be
satisfied with one consultation. If, especially, the confessor has
little experience, and the soul sees that he is fearful, and he
himself makes it continue to speak of the matter, that which by
rights should have remained very secret is made public, and
this soul is persecuted and tormented. For while it thinks the
matter is secret, it finds out that the visions are publicly
known. As a result many troublesome things happen to it and
could happen to its religious order, the way these times are
going. 1 1 Hence a great deal of discretion is necessary in this
matter, and I highly recommend it to the prioresses.
      1 0. A prioress should not think that since a Sister has
experiences like these she is better than the others. The Lord
leads each one as He sees is necessary. This path is a prepara­
tion for becoming a very good servant of God, provided that
one cooperates. But sometimes God leads the weakest along
this path. And so there is nothing in it to approve or condemn.
One should consider the virtues and who it is who serves our
Lord with greater mortification, humility, and purity of con­
science; this is the one who will be the holiest. Yet, little can be
known here below with certitude; we must wait until the true
Judge gives to each one what is merited. In heaven we will be
surprised to see how different His judgment is from what we
can understand here below. May He be forever praised, amen.


                                155
                       TERESA OF AVILA

                         CHAPTER NINE

     Treats of how the Lord communicates with the soul through an
imaginative vision; gives careful warning against desiring to walk by
this path and the reasons for such a warning. The chapter is very
beneficial.
      1 . Now let us come to imaginative visions, for they say the
devil meddles more in these than in the ones mentioned, 1 and it
must be so. But when these imaginative visions are from our
Lord, they in some way seem to me more beneficial because
they are in greater conformity with our nature. I'm excluding
from that comparison the visions the Lord shows in the last
dwelling place; no other visions are comparable to those.
      2. Well, now, let us consider what I have told you in the
preceding chapter2 about how this Lord is present. It is as
though we had in a gold vessel a precious stone having the
highest value and curative powers. We know very certainly
that it is there although we have never seen it. But the powers
of the stone do not cease to benefit us provided that we carry it
with us. 3 Although we have never seen this stone, we do not on
that account cease to prize it, because through experience we
have seen that it has cured us of some illnesses for which it is
suited. But we do not dare look at it or open the reliquary, nor
can we, because the manner of opening this reliquary is known
solely by the one to whom the jewel belongs. Even though he
loaned us the jewel for our own benefit, he has kept the key to
the reliquary and will open it, as something belonging to him,
when he desires to show us the contents, and he will take the
jewel back when he wants to, as he does.
      3 . Well, let us say now that sometimes he wants to open
the reliquary suddenly in order to do good to the one to whom
he has loaned it. Clearly, a person will afterward be much
happier when he remembers the admirable splendor of the
stone, and hence it will remain more deeply engrained in his
memory. So it happens here: When our Lord is pleased to give
more delight to this soul, He shows it clearly His most sacred
 humanity in the way He desires; either as He was when He
went about in the world or as He is after His resurrection. And
even though the vision happens so quickly that we could com­
pare it to a streak of lightning, this most glorious image
                                 1 56
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

remains so engraved on the imagination that I think it would
be impossible to erase it until it is seen by the soul in that place
where it will be enjoyed without end.
     4. Although I say "image," let it be understood that, in the
opinion of the one who sees it, it is not a painting but truly
alive, and sometimes the Lord is speaking to the soul and even
revealing great secrets. But you must understand that even
though the soul is detained by this vision for some while, it can
no more fix its gaze on the vision than it can on the sun. Hence
this vision always passes very quickly, but not because its
brilliance is painful, like the sun's, to the inner eye. It is the
inner eye that sees all of this. I wouldn't know how to say
anything about a vision that comes through the exterior sense
of sight, because this person mentioned, of whom I can speak
so particularly,4 had not undergone such a vision, and one
cannot be sure about what one has not experienced. The bril­
liance of this inner vision is like an infused light coming from a
sun covered by something as sparkling as a properly cut dia­
mond. The garment seems made of a fine Dutch linen. Almost
every time God grants this favor the soul is in rapture, for in its
lowliness it cannot suffer so frightening a sight.
      5. I say "frightening" because although the Lord's pres­
ence is the most beautiful and delightful a person could imag­
ine even were he to live and labor a thousand years thinking
about it (for it far surpasses the limitations of our imagination
or intellect), this presence bears such extraordinary majesty
that it causes the soul extreme fright. Certainly it's not neces­
sary here to ask how the soul knows, without having been told,
who the Lord is, for it is clearly revealed that He is the Lord of
heaven and earth. This is not true of earthly kings, for in
themselves they would be held in little account were it not for
their retinue, or unless they tell who they are.
     6. 0 Lord, how we Christians fail to know you! What will
that day be when You come to judge, for even when You come
here with so much friendliness to speak with your bride she
experiences such fear when she looks at You? 0 daughters,
what will it be like when He says in so severe a voice, depart you
who are cursed by My Father?5
     7. As a result of this favor granted by God, let us keep in
mind the above thought, for it will be no small blessing. Even
                                1 57
                     TERESA OF AVILA