these visible vanities. But these poisonous things we are dealing
with are the cause of this misfortune, for just as all is poisoned
if a viper bites someone and the wound swells, so we will be
poisoned if we do not watch ourselves. Clearly many remedies
are necessary to cure us, and God is favoring us a good deal if
we do not die from the wound. Certainly the soul undergoes
great trials here; and, especially, if the devil realizes that it has
all it needs in its temperament and habits to advance far, he
will gather all hell together to make the soul go back outside.
     6. Oh my Lord! Your help is necessary here; without it one
can do nothing.4 In Your mercy do not consent to allow this
soul to suffer deception and give up what was begun. Enlight­
en it that it may see how all its good is within this castle and
that it may turn away from bad companions. It's a wonderful
thing for a person to talk to those who speak about this interior
castle, to draw near not only to those seen to be in these rooms
where he is but to those known to have entered the ones closer
to the center. Conversation with these latter will be a great
help to him, and he can converse so much with them that they
will bring him to where they are. Let the soul always heed the
warning not to be conquered. If the devil sees that it has the
strong determination to lose its life and repose and all that he
offers it rather than return to the first room, he will abandon it
much more quickly. Let the soul be manly and not like those
soldiers who knelt down to drink before going into battle (I
don't remember with whom),5 but be determined to fight with
all the devils and realize that there are no better weapons than
those of the cross.
      7. Even though I've said this at other times,6 it's so impor­
tant that I repeat it here: It is that souls shouldn't be thinking
about consolations at this beginning stage. It would be a very
poor way to start building so precious and great ali edifice. If
the foundation is on sand, the whole building will fall to the
ground. They'll never finish being dissatisfied and tempted.
These are not the dwelling places where it rains manna; those
lie further ahead, where a soul finds in the manna every taste it
desires;7 for it wants only what God wants. It's an amusing
thing that even though we still have a thousand impediments
and imperfections and our virtues have hardly begun to
grow-and please God they may have begun-we are yet not
                                 51
                      TERESA OF AVILA

ashamed to seek spiritual delights in prayer or to complain
about dryness. May this never happen to you, Sisters. Embrace
the cross your Spouse has carried and understand that this
must be your task. Let the one who can do so suffer more for
Him, and she will be rewarded that much more. As for other
favors, if the Lord should grant you one, thank Him for it as
you would for something freely added on.
     8. It will seem to you that you are truly determined to
undergo exterior trials, provided that God favors you interior­
ly. His Majesty knows best what is suitable for us. There's no
need for us to be advising Him about what He should give us,
for He can rightly tell us that we don't know what we're asking
for.8 The whole aim of any person who is beginning prayer­
and don't forget this, because it's very important-should be
that he work and prepare himself with determination and
every possible effort to bring his will into conformity with
God's will. Be certain that, as I shall say later,9 the greatest
perfection attainable along the spiritual path lies in this confor­
mity. It is the person who lives in more perfect conformity
who will receive more from the Lord and be more advanced on
this road. Don't think that in what concerns perfection there is
some mystery or things unknown or still to be understood, for
in perfect conformity to God's will lies all our good. Now then,
if we err in the beginning, desiring that the Lord do our will at
once and lead us according to what we imagine, what kind of
stability will this edifice have? Let us strive to do what lies in
our power and guard ourselves against these poisonous little
reptiles, for the Lord often desires that dryness and bad
thoughts afflict and pursue us without our being able to get rid
of them. Sometimes He even permits these reptiles to bite us so
that afterward we may know how to guard ourselves better and
that He may prove whether we are greatly grieved by having
offended Him.
     9. Thus, if you should at times fall, don't become discour­
aged and stop striving to advance. For even from this fall God
will draw out good, as does the seller of an antidote who drinks
some poison in order to test whether his antidote is effective.
Even if we didn't see our misery-or the great harm that a
dissipated life does to us-through any other means than
through this assault that we endure for the sake of being
                                 52
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

brought back to recollection, that would be enough. Can there
be an evil greater than that of being ill at ease in our own
house? What hope can we have of finding rest outside of
ourselves if we cannot be at rest within? We have so many
great and true friends and relatives (which are our faculties)
with whom we must always live, even though we may not
want to. But from what we feel, these seem to be warring
against us because of what our vices have done to them. Peace,
peace, the Lord said, my Sisters; and He urged His apostle so
many times. 1° Well, believe me, if we don't obtain and have
peace in our own house we'll not find it outside. Let this war
be ended. Through the blood He shed for us I ask those who
have not begun to enter within themselves to do so; and those
who have begun not to let the war make them turn back. Let
these latter reflect that a relapse is worse than a fall; they
already see their loss. Let them trust in the mercy of God and
not at all in themselves, and they will see how His Majesty
brings them from the dwelling places of one stage to those of
another and settles them in a land where these wild animals
cannot touch or tire them, but where they themselves will
bring all these animals into subjection and scoff at them. And
they shall enjoy many more blessings than one can desire­
blessings even in this life, I mean.
      1 0. Since, as I've said in the beginning, 1 1 I've written to
you about how you should conduct yourselves in these distur­
bances set up here by the devil and how you cannot begin to
recollect yourselves by force but only by gentleness, if your
recollection is going to be more continual, I will not say
anything else here than that in my opinion it is very important
to consult persons with experience; for you will be thinking
that you are seriously failing to do some necessary thing.
Provided that we don't give up, the Lord will guide everything
for our benefit, even though we may not find someone to teach
us. There is no other remedy for this evil of giving up prayer
than to begin again; otherwise the soul will gradually lose more
each day-and please God that it will understand this fact.
      1 1 . Someone could think that if turning back is so bad it
would be better never to begin but to remain outside the castle.
I have already told you at the beginning-and the Lord Him­
self tells you-that anyone who walks in danger perishes in it12
                                 53
                     TERESA OF AVILA