6. Note one thing, Sisters, about these great desires to see
our Lord: They sometimes afflict so much that you must neces­
sarily avoid fostering them and must distract yourselves; if you
can, I mean, for in other instances that I shall mention further
on3 this cannot be done, as you will see. As for these initial
desires, it's sometimes possible to distract oneself from them
because there is every reason to be conformed to the will of
God and say what Saint Martin said.4 A person can reflect on
Saint Martin's words if the desires afflict a great deal. Since it
seems that these desires are characteristic of very advanced
persons, the devil could instigate them so that we might think
we are advanced. It is always good to walk with fear. But my
opinion is that he would not be able to give the quiet and peace
this suffering gives the soul; he would be stirring some passion,
as happens when we suffer over worldly things. But a person
who has no experience of the authentic and the inauthentic
desires will think his desires are something great and will help
them along as much as he can and will do serious harm to his
health. For this suffering is continual, or at least very habitual.
     7. Also note that a weak constitution is wont to cause
these kinds of suffering, especially in the case of tender persons
who will weep over every little thing. A thousand times they
will be led to think they weep for God, but they will not be
doing so. And it can even happen, when tears flow in abun­
dance (I mean, that for a time every little word the soul hears
or thinks concerning God becomes irresistible to tears), that
some humor has reached the heart, thereby contributing more
to the tears than does love for God; for seemingly these persons
will never finish weeping. Since they have already heard that
tears are good, they will not restrain themselves nor would
they desire to do anything else; and they help the tears along as
much as they can. The devil's aim here is that these persons
become so weak they will afterward be unable either to pray or
to keep their rule.
     8. It seems to me I can see you asking what you should do
since I mark danger everywhere and in something as good as
tears I think there can be deception; you are wondering if I
may be the one who is deceived. And it could be that I am. But
believe me, I do not speak without having seen that these false
tears can be experienced by some persons; although not by me,

                                140
                  THE INTERIOR CASTLE

for I am not at all tender. Rather, I have a heart so hard that
sometimes I am distressed; although when the inner fire is
intense, the heart, no matter how hard, distills like an alembic.
You will indeed know when this fire is the source of the tears,
for they are then more comforting and bring peace, not turbu­
lence, and seldom cause harm. The good that lies in the false
tears-when there is any good-is that the damage is done to
the body (I mean when there is humility) and not to the soul.
But even if there is no harm done to the body, it won't be
wrong to be suspicious about tears.
     9. Let's not think that everything is accomplished through
much weeping but set our hands to the task of hard work and
virtue. These are what we must pay attention to; let the tears
come when God sends them and without any effort on our part
to induce them. These tears from God will irrigate this dry
earth, and they are a great help in producing fruit. The less
attention we pay to them the more there are, for they are the
water that falls from heaven. The tears we draw out by tiring
ourselves in digging cannot compare with the tears that come
from God, for often in digging we shall get worn out and not
find even a puddle of water, much less a flowing well. There­
fore, Sisters, I consider it better for us to place ourselves in the
presence of the Lord and look at His mercy and grandeur and
at our own lowliness, and let Him give us what He wants,
whether water or dryness. He knows best what is suitable for
us. With such an attitude we shall go about refreshed, and the
devil will not have so much chance to play tricks on us.
     10. In the midst of these experiences that are both painful
and delightful together, our Lord sometimes gives the soul
feelings of j ubilation and a strange prayer it doesn't under­
stand. I am writing about this favor here so that if He grants it
to you, you may give Him much praise and know what is
taking place. It is, in my opinion, a deep union of the faculties;
but our Lord nonetheless leaves them free that they might en­
joy this joy-and the same goes for the senses-without under­
standing what it is they are enjoying or how they are enjoying.
What I'm saying seems like gibberish, but certainly the experi­
ence takes place in this way, for the joy is so excessive the soul
wouldn't want to enjoy it alone but wants to tell everyone
about it so that they might help this soul praise our Lord. All
                                141
                      TERESA OF AVILA