Is It Dissociation or
                  Is It Observation?
    When you learn to observe, you learn to separate, dis-associate,
or dis-identify yourself from what you are observing. Even if you
are noticing what is being experienced—there has to be a little
distance, just to notice or be aware of. Does this mean you go into
denial? Into dissociation? Is "space" the same as amnesia? Al-
though meditation is intended for dis-association, it can be used as
a way of "spiritualizing dissociation." Since the approaches in
Level 1 originate in Eastern meditation methods, I think it is
important to discuss this issue.
     With our society's new awareness of the psychology of abuse,
we are also quite concerned with what is called "dissociation" in
clinical circles. Dissociation is an automatic defense that protects
you during trauma. Dissociation occurs when you split off from an
experience, refusing to feel the pain or fear or humiliation of a
painful event. Usually, we learn to dissociate as children, when we
have few internal defenses to fall back upon. A child who is
molested by her father cannot allow herself to fully feelthe horror,
so she "shuts down" part of her reaction by splitting off from it. In
its most severe form, dissociation results in Multiple Personality
Disorder, something most of us know about only through movies
such as Sybil.
    The two main characteristics of dissociation are that it occurs
automatically, and that it allows a person to not eyerience some-
thing. When a child dissociates from feelings of abandonment, for
example, the split-off from feeling occurs automatically and uncon-
sciously, as a way of protecting the child. This closing over an
unbearable emotional wound is just like skin cells automatically
beginning to generate over a physical wound without any conscious
thought on the part of the injured person.
    The dis-association of self-observation, by contrast, allows you
to become aware of whatyou are alreadyfeeling, and happens only
as a consequence of conscious choice. As I begin to feel anxious, I
can consciously choose to use part of my awareness to observe what
I am feeling, rather than sinking into the quicksand of anxious
                          Getting Out of the Thick of Tiiings - 31
feelings as though it were the only available internal landscape. The
attitude behind the observing or witnessing activity is not one of, "I
shouldn't have this feeling," or "I hope this passes quickly."
Observation is free of judgments, evaluation, significance and
preference. When you are in true observation, you feel free to
experience the emotion and free to stop experiencing it. By contrast,
dissociation is a process that leaves you free only not to experience
the emotion; you are not free to experience it, as the way you are
when observing. Dis-association in observation runs equally in all
directions of experience: you are free to feel sad, anxious, happy,
and you are equally free to choose to not feel the particular effect.
    Meditation and observation practices, however, can certainly
be misused as a way of attempting to dissociate from uncomfortable
or threatening feelings. And it is certainly true that many abused
peoplehave found solace in meditation,because the disidentification
that is the goal of many Eastern approaches seems so similar to the
patterns of dissociation underlying their own emotional lives.
    The differences between dissociation and Quantum observa-
tion are crucial, Dissociation is born of trauma, it happens
automatically and unconsciously as a survival tactic, and it anesthe-
tizes feelings and emotions. Quantum observation is born of choice,
it is chosen consciously and intentionally and encompasses what-
ever is being felt and thought. The space that occurs as a result of
observing an ongoing experience is not a space of denial, or
amnesia, orblankness. It is actually the space of allowance whereby
nothing need be excludedfrom awareness.
    Let me give another example. In the monastery I lived in in
India, and certainly in some other spiritual communities, many
emotions and thoughts are considered "impure," "bad," a "barrier"
to enlightenment, etc. Certainly, also in psychotherapy circles there
is often an implicit message that anger is something to "work on"
and a problem, while "love" is okay and a goal. Often, particularly
in the former case, meditation or some transcendent technique is
used to repress, or nullify feelings labeled as "bad." In psychology
circles, certain techniques reinforce this bad (anger)/ good (love)
dichotomy. As will be discussed in detail in Chapter 5, to prefer or
be unwilling to have a particular experience requires a judgment.
This is not Quantum observation.
     The point is not to block an experience of, say, feeling unwor-
32 - Quantum Consciousness
thy, but to add to it the state of observing. When you dissociate, you
are simply catapulted outside of the conscious arena of feeling—but
the feeling remains in a repressed form. In Quantum observation,
the feeling is "free to be," but your awareness of it accompanies you
through the experience.
    Let me state it another way since this a question that comes up
in many of my workshops. If you are in Quantum observation you
are intentionally dis-associating from (not associating with) a
feeling but simultaneously you are free tofeelthe feeling andfree
not to feel the feeling. Stated another way, you can have the feeling
or not have the feeling. This is Quantum observation. On the other
hand, if you can only not have the feeling, if you are trying to get
away from it or not experience it, and you label it bad, not
constructive, or unspiritual, you are dissociating.
   A pictorial example might be helpful. A trainee of mine once
asked me "how do I know if I am observing and the anger is
handled."I picked up my coffee cup by the handle and said,"If I can
pick up the coffee cup and put it down it is handled,I am in Quantum
observation, and I am free. If I cannot pick-up the anger and put it
down, then I am not free. If I cannot pick-up the anger and
experience it, then I am dissociating."
   Some of us are natural dissociators and some of us are natural
mergers. Where you fall on the emotional continuum will affect
how you experience the exercises in Level 1. A person who
chronically dissociates is going to have a very different time with
these exercises than a person who tends to be very emotional. The
dissociator will be accustomed to separating himself from his
internal responses, whereas the feeler will be accustomed to iden-
tifying strongly with each and every response and reaction. If you
are a dissociator, learning to observe will seem familiar, but
allowing yourself to feel what you're experiencing will be more
foreign. If you are a feeler, learning to detach part of yourself in
order to observe (rather then respond) will be more foreign. Simply
be aware of the aspects of the process that are unfamiliar to you, and
observe your responses to the new experience.
      If you are unsure which way of functioning is most character-
istic for you, think of an experience that disturbs you in any way and
then ask yourself two simple questions:
                           Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 33
(1) Am I willing to merge with the experience?

    If you are dissociating even somewhat, you will not be
    willing or able to totally merge with the experience of, say,
    anger, and your answer would be "no." If you tend to
    respond reactively, your answer would probably be "Yes."

(2) Am I willing to not merge with the experience?

    Your answer here would be "Yes," if you tend to dissociate
    from your feelings. By contrast, if you tend to over-identify
    with your emotional states, your answer would be "no."