Many people believe you first have an experience, and then you
organize a belief to fit the experience.
     For example, if a father is repeatedly abusive to a child, the child
could decide and "globalize" * that "all men are mean." Based on
the child's interpretation of reality, this could begin to actualize in
all his/her relationships with men. Dr. Eric Berrie, the creator of
transactional analysis in the 1960s and author of the book Games
People Play explored this territory. He summarized that beliefs
were created during particularexperiences, and that these "games,"
as he labeled them, became automatic strategies that people would
use to relate to others. A child that is victimized decides he has no
choice but to act like a victim to survive in his family. His father
could be the persecutor, his mother the rescuer. Since the family has
agreed, on some level, to play this game out, it is mutually rein-
forced and internalized by the child.
     Then, as he goes further into the world, he sees himself as an
eternal victim. This game becomes the only way he feels like he will
be taken care of, orbe cared about. His perception of caring and love
become automatic from repeated experiences—automatically he
believes he is a victim and interprets everything through that filter.
He literally has tunnel vision. Since the only way he received
attention from his parents was to remain a victim, he continues this
and projects this automatic strategy. This belief structure is so
reinforced it influences him to continue this relationship with other
people. He begins to look for a rescuer or persecutor. Different
beliefs and patterns become part-(icles) in his consciousness. People
tend to be attracted to each other in terms of opposites or trade-offs.
The victim, who longs to be taken care of, becomes involved with
a person, who needs to take care of, like a rescuer. In consciousness,
the part-(icles) become identified and frozen. People no longer feel
like the creators of their lives and choices.
     In terms of understanding human psychologicaldynamics from
a quantum perspective, our ordinary outlook must be framed
differently. In quantum terms, the observer of the experience
influences how the experience is interpreted through the act of
observation. Subjective reality becomes filtered and colored by the
process of being observer-created. Hence, the reality becomes

*Globalize is a term used in Cognitive Therapy when we create a belief and make it a global
truth.
'Filtering is another term used in cognitive thcrapy to describe how we "take in" some
experiences and "filter out others."
                                                             Getting to Zero - 101

labeled by the observer, and the nature of the experience is decided.
For example, if Dad treated you in a particular manner, the observer
creates the meaning or the way the experience is construed. One
person may decide abuse is love, another may decide abuse is not
happening, and another may decide abuse hurts; all realities are
given a meaning, which condenses energy into part-(icles). In this
decision process, the observer freezes orholds energy in a particular
way. This condensation of energy then becomes more rigid because
it is held in place by particular beliefs, attitudes, perceptions.
      Observers, as they label experiences, tend to identify and fuse
with them. They decide, "This is me." From this point their energy
becomes more bound by belief and, as we have demonstrated, an
observer-created reality. This process is experienced in individual
consciousness as a "part-(icle)"—it has psychic weight, mass, and
energy of its own.This is why in therapy the therapist refers to a part
of you being this way or that way. When people become a part-
(icle), they no longer experience the space or choice to see life
differently. The tension held in these part-(icles) remains and the
observer function colors the experience from its own filtering. The
true nature of observation, or the witness, is lost.
     Unfortunately, as we become fused* with the part-(icje), we
lose the ability to have choice over our reality. The perspective of
life becomes narrow and "stuck." Many forms of therapy and
spiritual practice are cognizant of witnessing, being mindful, or
awake. They ask that we look at the particular patterns. In this way
we begin to observe our limitation, but do not find ourselves out of
these individual part-(icle) realities. It is important to clarify and
reinforce: we do not create Dad to be a certain way, but we create
our subjective experience of Dad being a certain way.
     This is our departure point. Most Eastern and Western ap-
proaches ask us to be aware of, watch, notice, observe, or witness,
"our process." The problem is the same one I experienced meditat-
ing three to five hours a day for 12 years. Icould witness and observe
everything. The problem was that I was witnessing the same "stuff"
over and over again, whether thcre was just a blank space or an
unpleasant thought or feeling. What it took me twelve years to
realize was that the observer creates that which he/she is observing.
This instantaneous process of observer creating his/her object, and

* Fusion is a term developed in structural family therapy.
102 - Quantum Consciousness
giving the appearance that the object was always there, left me
stuck. I experienced this phenomenon because I, as the observer,
was creating through the act of observation, an internal experience.
The next quantum jump, takes us out of the illusion of passive
observer of the world to the observer-created reality. This is where
witnessing as a meditation practice must be left behind, or like the
experience presented, you will be witnessing and observing the
mind forever, since you as the observer are creating the mind lo
observe. Gestalt psychology, so aware of unfinished business
which keeps popping up as foreground, calls zero point, "the point
where you (the observer) meet the now."


                     The Approach
     The next approach allows individuals to see that the observer
creates what it observes, in terms of how an experience is subjec-
tively experienced. Without an approach or "how to," it would be
just more mental masturbation. Here the proof is in the pudding. If
you can, as the observer, stop creating subjective reality, then the
approach works. Otherwise, it is just more ideas for the mind.
     Here the active observer of quantum physics, meets the more
passive Eastern observer/witness. We do not create an unpleasant
incident happening to us-—car accident, war, loss of a loved one.
However, as we discovered in exploring part-(icle) realities, we do
funnel our experience and judge and categorize it according to our
constructed belief systems. In this way we influence how an
experience is subjectively experienced.
   Perhaps a child has progressed through a difficult life: poverty,
abuse and pain. He/she could easily choose a global belief such as,
"Life is hard." As the observer decides this reality, then the reality
is subjectively created again and again. The present-time reality
becomes fixed by the observer/creator, and all experiences are
interpreted this way. Thus, a person's presentexperience is clouded
by the past created filters. These realities were subjective at the time
but also based on the external reality presented by the person.
However functional in the past, it becomes dysfunctional when
created automatically because the person loses choice.
    The point to start exploring this phenomenon is with the
subjective reality you are creating automatically. In this level, the
                                              Getting to Zero - 103
observer, which is you, is asked to learn the skill of creating
knowingly instead of unknowingly. This skillinvolves the ability to
cease or stop creating a subjective experience. This new-found
ability takes us from the victim position, of feeling unaware and
helpless about our experience, to being able to choose or cease a
certain automatic subjective reality.
     Our next section provides a context and experiential exercises
to help us take responsibility for our personal, subjective reality.
The goal is to free the observer so he/she may be unobstructed from
prior created realities and experiences. Here, an observer can
observe without the distractions that pop-up in the mind.