In this chapter we will focus on the second part,"observation creates
reality". In Chapter IX and X, we will focus on the first part,"There
is no reality in the absence of observation."
     The exploration of zero point is a pivotal juncture in looking at
how we continually create our subjective experience of reality. To
understand and dismantle our own personal aspect of "observer
created" reality is the theme of this chapter.
     The realities we interpret as objective, we can begin to see are,
in actuality, subjective. Our very act of observing, as stated in the
Cophenhagen interpretation, creates our realities. To shift aware-
ness to this level of consciousness is the focus of this zero point
chapter and exercises. The point of observation here, is called "zero
point". Often in workshops, I ask participants to "create an image
of a deer in the middle of the room." Then I ask them to take their
attention (observation) off of it and let it disappear—it does—then
to look to see if it is still there. It reappears. Why? Because the act
of observation creates the observed. In this case, the act of observa-
tion again creates the image of the deer.
90 - Quantum Consciousness

              Quantum Exercise 18

    Observation creates reality.

    Step I       Create an image of a deer in the middle of
                 your room.

    Step II      Stop observing it and allow it to disappear.

    Step Ill:    Check to see if it is still there.


     Generally, it re-creates itself through the act of you looking for
it. Sometimes workshop participants cannot "get rid of the deer."
Why? Because they keep looking to see if it's gone. The looking
creates the imaginary deer's presence. This phenomenon also
occurs in our personal psychology. We create, through the use of
attention, a particular subject (thought, etc.) and observe it appear-
ing. It also disappears as we take our attention away.


              Exploring the "Creative
              Aspect of the Observer
    This section, like the last series integrates Eastern philosophy,
psychology and quantum physics. These areas will be explored
from theoretical and experiential modalities. This will enable the
reader to experience the "creative aspect of the observer." We will
entertain the notion of getting back to who we are by de-constmct-
ing various old created parts within our perceptions that are no
longer of any value.
    For example, the observer, through observation, can create the
subjective experience of hopelessness. Unfortunately, as will be
demonstrated later, the observer fuses with, and experientially
becomes, this hopelessness and thinks that is who he/she is. A
teacher in India once said, "Personality is a mis-taken identity." As
we become identified with these created aspects, we conclude this
                                               Getting to Zero - 91
is who we are, rather than this is what I constructed to perceive
myself. Another way to say it is this is a selflens that I created, and
it will define me and my world.


                Practice Realities,
               an Inner Exploration
    Let us first start with physics as our point of departure. In
physics there is a central question which concerns the nature of
 matter. This question is relative to the experiment and to the
observer of the experiment which is crucial. The question that
remains, "is the nature of matter a wave or a particle?" We will
explore the varying nature of particles and how this impacts
internal, subjective realities.
     In the last two chapters, we explored the wave-like function of
internal reality and its energy function. In this chapter we willfocus
on the part-(icle) and mass function of reality, how aspects or parts
of ourself were created by us at an early age by the observer, and
now act as automatic behaviors, and selflens.
     In psychology, the term "part" refers to an aspect of our
individual personality. Using this terminology and combining it
with quantum physics,helps introduce the concept of the part-(icle).
A part-(icle) is part of the "unbroken wholeness of the Quantum
world." Like a part of a person, a part-(icle) is a part of the whole.
Furthermore, when the whole or the undifferentiated energy pre-
sented in our last chapter is broken down through labeling, the
whole becomes a solid mass-like structure called a part-(icle), in
this case a part of our personality. Once we identify with a part, we
become limited and cut-off from the whole, feeling heavy, solid and
massive. We lose the lightness we seek due to the rigidity of
boundaries and the process of fusion and identification.
     In the following exploration of consciousness, we will view our
inner world in the context of the nature of mass and part-(icles). In
earlier exercises we were asked to observe thoughts that come and
go, and feelings that come and go. We have explored witnessing
from a nonjudgmental observer place, where the phenomena of
these transient states floating by are perceived. We have also
noticed that all of the above have a particular energy, which is
92 - Quantum Consciousness
transmutable and transformable as exemplified in the practice of
seeing particular emotions, thoughts, or body sensations as energy.
Now we can begin to explore how beliefs and experiences can be
viewed as part-(icles). The following exercise continues our build-
ing block approach in understanding how reality is created by our
subjective observation and creation of automatic responses.




          Quantum Exercise 19
    Labels create part-(icles)

    Step I:      Notice an emotion that has troubled you, i.e.
                 sadness, anger, hurt.

    Step II:     Decide the emotion is "bad or unwanted".
                 Notice how your inner experience feels.

    Step Ill:    De-label it, and see it as energy and observe.




    Usually people notice that their labels filter and influence how
they experience an emotion. How we chose to label an emotion or
thought, influences our internal, subjective experience. A former
decision about an experience, a former belief about the world,
prevents us from allowing in new information. Hence, through our
label, we experience and condense an emotion into a part-(icle),
which is condensed energy. Due to the fixed nature of our thoughts
or beliefs, the condensed energy, which has become a part-(icle),
begins to become more dense energy or mass. (See illustration # 6
&7)
    The more it is reinforced through labeling and reinforcing
experiences, the more fixed in consciousness the part-(icle) be-
comes. The energy becomes more solidified since the person holds
a set of fixed beliefs around it. Different or new information cannot
flow in or out. (See illustration # 8). Consciousness then becomes
                                       Getting to Zero - 93

                   Illustration 6
This is undifferentiated energy before the label of fear
is fixed.




                   Illustration 7
Below is what occurs when undifferentiated energy is
labeled fear. The energy becomes a solid particle with
mass.
94 - Quantum Consciousness

                         Illustration 8
   Below we see solidified energy, solid with mass and
   boundaries. Here, an individual is saying, "I like you,"
   but the boundaried energy, labeled fear, cannot allow it
   inside. Simply put, once energy is labeled and made into
   a particle or mass—nothing can get in and nothing can
   get out.




less fluid for the person; they experience their choices as less
spacious and more condensed and heavy (mass). They may even
lose the ability to perceive the part-(icle) as a belief. Instead they
begin to see themselves as a particularbelief, with little choice over
their experience. In a nutshell the observer fuses with and becomes
his/her beliefs, forgetting he/she is the observer, labeler and creator
of the neutral energy. This is done through the process of decision.
Noted Buddhist teacher Tarthang Tulku says it this way: