Albert Einstein's quotation about the relationship between
form and emptiness bears a striking resemblance to a Buddhist
principle stated over 2,500 years ago in The Heart Sutra: "Form is
none other than emptiness and emptiness is none other than form."
Both quotations, one from a rich and ancient spiritual tradition, one
the product of 20th-century science, make the same statement about
the nature of the universe: everything in it, including the space in
which everything exists, is all made of the same substance or
emptiness. And; physical and non-physical reality are the same.
  Everything in the physical universe has form; form creates what
Bohm called the explicate order of sizes, shapes, mass, density-
from air to leaves to couches to people. If we looked through a
"sub-atomic lens" at a couch or leaf, however, we would see
particles/waves floating in what looks like nothing—what we
would call emptiness, a void. It would be like looking at a black sky
on a starlit night. The stars are the form; the sky is the emptiness.
From a quantum perspective, the fascinating point is that the
emptiness that surrounds the stars and the stars themselves are both
made of the same material. When I look at the sky, I see what looks
like very different substances—solid particles we call"stars", open
empty space we call "sky—but it's really nice to know that on
another level it's all the same substance.
    In order for there to be a "you" and a "me," there has to be
consensual boundaries that create the appearance of a distinction
between you and me, between chairs and tables, between trees and
sky. These consensual boundaries constitute how we normally
perceive the world, how we live atthe explicate level of form. When
we get some sense that these boundaries do not exist on the quantum
level—that what we perceive as wide-open space is composed of
the same particles and waves as objects we perceive as dense and
"physical"—then the limited, isolating experience of you-ness and
me-ness dissolves into a comforting space of union and knowingness.
               The Stepping Stones of Quantum Consciousness - 21
    At Level 6 we experience the interconnection of all things.
Level 7 takes us one step further by saying that not only does
everything overlap, but everything is actually made of the same
material. The relationship between objects thus moves beyond one
of interpenetration to a level of universal sameness or oneness. It's
more than saying, "Edward's energy overlaps Lucy's energy;    " it's
saying that the substance that comprises the body we call"Edward"
is identicalto that which we call "Lucy." There isn't just overlap-
on the quantum level there is pure, unbroken "is-ness."

    This book could not be written in the quantum consciousness of
Level 7 because it is impossible, at this level of "perception" or
'"knowingness," to make the distinctions required for description
and exposition. The joke is that by the time you are actually able to
experience Level 7, this book no longer exists as a separate object
with distinguishing characteristics. Or perhaps it is more realistic to
say that just as you recognized the true lack of boundaries between
yourself and the world around you, you would also recognize the
non-quantum nature of this book that, ironically, is all about
Quantum Consciousness. As one of the founders of quantum
physics, Neils Bohr, stated, "There is no such thing as a quantum
world, just a quantum description" (Herbert, 1985).
     Now we are back to that annoying question of my friend,"Why
would I want to disappear into the soup of everything else?" Given
that religious and philosophical traditions across the centuries have
proffered basic ideas of Level 7 as the highest achievement of
human consciousness, there must be something appealing in it.
    To experience the "end point" of Quantum Consciousness is to
experience the fundamental freedom from separated, individual
selfhood. To arrive at the experience requires us, paradoxically, to
interact with our selfhood in some way. Eastern traditions have
erected thousands of monasteries and temples to provide structure
and location for how that interaction is to take place. The purpose
of the quantum approach is to provide a way for recognizing unity
consciousness that is both experiential and practical, a way that
enables people to develop a new context in which problem resolu-
tion can occur more easily.
     Finding the useful, life-enhancing applications of Level 7—as
well as exploring its further reaches—willbe the subject of Chapter
22 - Quantum Consciousness
9. For now, it is enough to hold an open mind to the possibility that
there is an experience of expansion to be found in this culminating
Level of Quantum Consciousness.
Three

                                     GETTING


               Thick OF Things
    I'm just sittin here watching the wheels go round and
    round. ..I really love to watch them roll.. .no longer ridin on
    the merry-go-round. ..I just had to let it go...I just had to let
    it go...l just had to let it go.
                                                      John Lennon


 The "Me Generation" of the past two decades has taken us into a
psychological land of deep attachments and fierce identifications.
Our culture of narcissism, as some have termed these times,
encourages us to name our wants, desires, and wishes and "go for


                                   23
24 - Quantum Consciousness
it." In order to rev up the stearn required to "go for it," however, we
first have to invest a great amount of ourselves in ideals, objects, and
values that lie outside us. This means we have to identify' with
them—strongly—or we wouldn't be willing to exert effort to get
them.
    From a quantum perspective, there is nothing "wrong" with
attachments and identifications; they are simply a sliver of the total
pie of human consciousness. From the point of view of personal
experience, however, attachments and identifications generally
lead to discomfort, dissatisfaction, and even pain. When perform-
ing some aspect of your job poorly (as everyone is bound to do at
least once in a lifetime) results in feeling humiliated, stupid,
incompetent, or just plain depressed, then you are identifying with
your job in a way that causes pain. If you feel overwhelmed by
feelings of inadequacy eachtime a task, event, or interaction doesn't
go your way, it is because you are, in essence, looking at yourself
through a peashooter. The result is a very confined and limited sense
of self that is also usually quite fragile.
    Quantum physics has made it possible for us to put away our
peashooters once and for all, and don, instead, what I call a
"quantum lens." Looking at life through this quantum lens offers a
vastly more expansive vista than we are accustomed to beholding.
It also alters the very boundaries upon which our current world is
based. Like stepping into a transporter room on Star Trek's Enter-
prise and suddenly dematerializing there only to reconstellate
someplace else, the quantum lens also acts as a transporter—so that
what was once a clearly defined object or body with a great deal of
mass and weight now becomes a shimmering pattern of particles
capable of transcending the space/time barrier.
    But first things first. Before we experience the more breathtak-
ing aspects of Quantum Consciousness, some basic pathways have
to be established in order for us to exchange our peashooters for
quantum lenses.
                            Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 25

   Learning to Observe the Invisible
         Level I: The "Wave" Function
          As the observer ofthe contents of my mind (thoughts,
        feelings, emotions, sensations, associations), I am more
                     than the contents of my mind.