Quantum Exercise 24
    Experiencing the boundary and shape of a
    thought, belief or emotion.

    Step I:     First allow yourself to chose a feeling you
                are experiencing.

    Step II:    Intentionally observe the feeling.

    Step Ill:   Intentionally merge with and experience it.

    Step IV:    Notice the size and shape of the feeling.

    Step V:     Be the feeling inside the shape.

    Step VI:    Step out of the shape and notice how your
                experience changes.



    The shapes and boundaries create the illusion of separateness.
These boundaries allow us to identify and be in varying emotional,
intellectual experiences that without contracted boundaries would
not occur. (A person would only experience one undifferentiated
energy!) Everything would flow into everything else, or as Bohm
recounts, "Everything interpenetrates everything else." Other dis-
ciplines have acknowledged the importance of the boundary and
how each part-(icle) has its own shape. Jung asked that the energy
be seen as a shape. Esoteric literature calls it a "thought form;"
q uantum physics, "part-(icles)." Psychology calls it "parts" or
"patterns." In Sanskrit, eastern religions call these compacted
thought forms "samskaras"
   "Thought has a definite form...the thought becomes for a
    time a living creature you called a thought-force." (Besart,
    1969)
114 - Quantum Consciousness
    As noted in the above exercise, we can see that thoughts,
emotions, sensations, and body responses have boundaries or
shapes. By observing these thought forms, elaborated on by well-
known psychic Edgar Cayce you can begin to notice that you do not
have to be identified as being these thoughtforms. Noted physicist
John Wheeler calls these thoughtforms "bubbles in a pond" or
"quantum foam". Each of these bubbles, part-(icles), contains
feelings, thoughts, emotions, associations—but also emptiness.
Usually, this is the "space" we do not acknowledge because we are
so identified with the other material. As observation witnessing
occurs, we begin to be less pulled, or identified, with these bubbles
and become more aware of the space. At first,they appear to be more
bubbles, thought forms, or part-(icles); but, as we create them
intentionally we experience more space. Edgar Cayce defined us as
many clusters of these thoughtforms. It is interesting to note that all
these clusters hold stories, memories, ideas, and history.


               Quantum Exercise 25

    Step I:      First allow yourself to choose a feeling you
                 are experiencing.

    Step II:     Intentionally observe the feeling.

    Step Ill:    Notice the size and shape of the feeling.

    Step IV:     Fuse with the feeling and experience inside
                 the shape. Notice how you experience the
                 shape. How is it different than observing
                 the emotion?

    Step V:      Step out of it, and notice how your experi-
                 ence changes.

    Step VI:     See the part-(icle) or thought form as made
                 of energy.
                                              Getting to Zero - 115

    Step VII: Realize that it is just a bubble or part-(icle)
               you created through the act of labeling the
               energy.

    Step VIII: See it as energy and allow the part-(icle) to
                do whatever it does.



     Acknowledging the creative aspect of the observer allows us to
de-label and, therefore, stop creating, unknowingly, thoughts and
feelings out of energy. We forget that how we define ourselves has
been constructed by us (the observer/creator). The problem is that
the boundaries or edges of these forms become lost when we
become fused or merged with them. Only as we observe these
created realities with some objectivity do we begin to notice they
have shapes and boundaries. Mostof us have experienced an intense
emotional state. As this emotion occurs, it seems to take over our
existence—we feel we are the anger, love, hate. Only when we
experience these intense states do we begin to dissipate the charge
from the emotion. Then, we can step back, observe, and begin to
notice we are separate from, and also the creator of, the intra-
psychic experience. As Gertrude and Rubin Blanck illustrate in
their research:

    "Here we see the relationship between mind as content as
    a result of boundaries in space. In fact, these boundaries are
    mind as content, and what constitutes psychic structure."
    (Blanck,1974:11).

    The concept of self surrounded by boundaries is not a new one.
However, within this self many part-(icles) or thoughtforms are
contained, which is the way experiences are held solid like part-
(ides). Since the observer created this structure, it is also able to
dismantle it. The psychic structure of these part-(icles) is held in
place in space. The self as we know it, or the aspects of the self in
the content of the mind, begins to create a self-image, based on these
held labels. As A.H. Almaas suggests:

    "Understanding the dynamic relation between self-image
    and space, we can theorize about the development of
116 - Quantum Consciousness

    psychic structures; the development of self-image simply
    represents a gradual building and constructing of bound-
    aries in the mind space." (Almaas, 1986:34)
    Since we all tend to identify ourselves with our experience, we
begin to lose sight of the fact that we are more than the structures or
images in our mind. The images often become the basis of our self-
image. For example, a traumatic memory such as being slapped by
an abusive parent becomes hypnotizing. It is labeled "bad," as we
discussed before, and held in place. Different forms of therapy
would take alternative methods to discharge this from the persons
consciousness. Ericksonian therapy may center on re-framing the
memory to orient the person to a different way of perceiving the
experience. Gestalt therapy may work on the feelings left unfin-
ished in the memory. Other forms may deal with the cognitive
decisions made in the moment.


                         The Space
    In order to look at this from a quantum perspective, it becomes
necessary to include the space that surrounds the image orstructure.
This allows space for the picture to alter, and also allows the person
more space to dis-identify from the memory. The observer can learn
to include the space in his/her awareness. This space gives the
observer more ability to observe the part-(icles) or thought forms
arising in consciousness. This helps prevent the person from auto-
matically fusing with the created structures and images, as we have
illustrated before.


               Quantum Exercise 26

    Step I:      Notice an old memory that keeps popping
                 up in your consciousness, i.e., Mom/Dad
                 doing X to you.

    Step II:     Observe the memory, noticing its shape.
                                                Getting to Zero - 117
    Step Ill:     Allow your awareness to notice the space
                  surrounding the memory (picture).

    Step IV:      Notice how the picture loses some of its
                  charge when the space is included.



     Because we see these memories and observe them, we forget we
are the observer/creators as we fuse or become identified. The point
is that we hypnotize ourselves into thinking we are these memories.
To assist people to get back to zero, it is important to reach the ability
to observe internal realities. This prevents the re-creation of feel-
ings that you are only your memories. It allows the person to work
with the part-(icles) or thought form and dismantle it, to experience
the space that was initially present. Observation allows the
thought forms to be perceived, the content of the thought form
acknowledged and its size and shape to be seen. It allows the
recognition that we are not the content of our minds.
    Space is the substance that allows us to place experiences, such
as part-(icle) realities, in a form. Without space there would be no
way to contain experience. Imagine for a moment a photo album
(See Chapter VII) that is one foot by two feet in size. Now, imagine
a small snapshot that is pasted in the middle of the photo album. If
the observer uses just the amount of awareness to see the photo, that
is all that occupies his/her vision. If, however, the observer expands
his/her awareness to include the entire one by two foot page, the
picture loses its encompassing significance. Since the space around
the photo is included, the picture or experience has a different
context when it is viewed. The person becomes less identit'ied with
the picture. This is not to avoid the experience, but to understand
that all our viewpoints are subjective in the way they arc perceived
or viewed. This can be practised when you go to a movie theatre.
When you watch a movie, notice that the more you fuse with the
story, the more real and exciting the movie feels. If I notice the black
border of the wall or screen the movie is being projected on, the
movie loses its charge. In short, when you include the space (in the
movie theatre of your mind) the movie or image loses its signifi-
cance. In essence, you see it as a movie rather than real.
118 - Quantum Consciousness
Principle: All thoughts, feelings, emotions, associations, pictures,
and experiences occur in space. (This will be discussed in detail in
Chapter VII.)