Here the living void is the same as the quantum field. The
quantum field being the fundamental substance. Einstein stated,
"Particles are only local condensations of the fields." Quantum
Psychology would say I-dentities, subpersonalities, false selves,
etc., are only local condensations of the quantum field or void. This
is very profound, because here we are saying that everything is
made of this quantum field or void. Everything you call yourself is
a condensation of this quantum field or void.
                                              The Living Void - 167
  What has occurred in quantum physics is that as we break down
matter into smaller and smallerparts,eventually parts disappear and
we are left with this basic Quantum field or void. Now, since
everything is interconnected and disappears upon investigation, the
question emerges, "If I investigate this illusive self I call "me",
might it not disappear along with the problems of the self?"
     In modem psychology the self is emphasized as if it existed
independently. Psychology's basic goal is to create some kind of
idealized self, a self that is self-actualized, according to Abraham
Maslow. A self that is fully functioning.
     I once worked with a transactional analysis trainer who defined
health as "saying what you mean, meaning what you say, getting
what you want, wanting what you get." Again we are trying to build
in a self or create a self who can handle all kinds of situations and
has all resources available. We are trying to create a self by
imagining a "separate self" existing independently from other
selves. At an implicate level, this separation is imaginary, because
the self is a part-(icle) which occurs when the quantum field or
emptiness condenses. This means that the self is condensed empti-
ness and emptiness is a thinned-out self.


                      Applications
     OftenIam asked in workshops,"How canIapply thisto my real
life problems?"
     In 1985, I realized that I was an incest survivor, having been
molested by my aunt at an early age. When I went back into therapy
as a client many memories of what occurred were being held in my
body as a body memory.
    Many forms of body centered therapy concur, that the physical
body has a memory of traumatic events. Wilhelm Reich, the
grandfather of body centered therapy, wrote a detailed book entitled
Character Analysis in the 1940s. Here Reich designates certain
styles of holding our body indicating particular strategies or ways
of being, perceiving and experiencing life. The body carries memo-
ries of traumatic events, consequently, with clients I work with and
psychotherapists ltrain,l suggest that people suffering from trauma
need some form of body therapy, so that the memories and traumas
kept within the body can be released.
168 - Quantum Consciousness
    In cases of severe abuse, a simple massage can be therapeutic
for the individual suffering from post traumatic stress disorder since
often there is resistance to touch. Further along, Feldenkrais'
"Awareness through movement"., and the body work of Rolfing
have helped incest survivors "stand" in the world in a different way.
     For myself, during deep tissue therapy, particularly while areas
between my legs were being worked on, I quite spontaneously, saw
images of my aunt's face in my mind's eye. The images of her face
looked like a film; the picture would arise within that empty-space
Ihad with my eyesclosed.l began to "see"ihat the picture was made
of the same substance as the space that surrounded the picture. I
would watch the picture arise in space and be with and experience
the picture of my aunt. The picture of my aunt (foreground), as I
experienced it, would thin out and become the emptiness which
surrounded it (background). The picture was condensed emptiness.
The emptiness was thinned out picture—it was all made of the same
quantum field or void.
    This would later become the quantum exercise I used with
numerous clients working with incest, rapes and post traumatic
stress disorder. The memory of the trauma is contained within a
space and is surrounded by space. After working with the memory,
which is quite solid, modem psychotherapy helps the client to
reduce charge from the memory, so it becomes less solid, and the
client can let go of it orbe less affected by the memorSAs therapists
know, as the issue (memory) is worked on it becomes less charged,
more diffused, and the client feels freer of it. Why? Because its mass
(solidness) begins to dissolve as it is experienced. At this point,
whether working with your own memories or helping another with
his/her past remembrances, ask the client or yourself to condense
down the emptiness seen behind closed eyes and make a memory
(picture), then to thin it out into the emptiness. Doing this several
times helps to "see" the memory for what it is condensed empti-
ness.
     If you, or a client feels the picture is too solid, then have them
make many duplicate copies of the picture (condensed emptiness)
until some of the energy associated with the memory dissipates. I
am not suggesting in anyway that this is the cure all for post
traumatic stress orjust burdensome unpleasant memories. This will
not necessarily help everybody. This way of working can, however,
                                              The Living Void - 169
be an add-on to whatever process or work that is being done.
Furthermore, issues of severe trauma that carry intense emotional
charge are not going to be released until the person is willing to
experience the emotions involved in the trauma, to varying degrees.
This approach can be used at the right moment to speed-up the
letting go process. I am mentioning this, because often people have
a tendency to "beat themselves upf
                                " i the memory keeps coming
back. If the memory keeps coming back, the pictures and incidents
still have too much energy associated with them. They must be de-
solidified through experiencing, before they can go through this
condensing-thinning out process. This approach can, in many
instances help to process the problem (memory) and return it to its
original substance, the quantum field or emptiness.

    "The solution of the problems of life is seen in the vanishing
    of the problem." (Wittgenstien, 1961:73).
The next exercise will help to exemplify this.


               Quantum Exercise 5 1

    (Eyes closed)

    Step I:      Allow a painful memory to come up into the
                 emptiness behind your eyes.

    Step II:     Be with and experience the picture.

    Step Ill:    Notice the emptiness that surrounds the
                 picture.

    Step IV:     See the picture as condensed emptiness.

    Step V:      Condense emptiness and make it into the
                 picture.
170 - Quantum Consciousness
    Step VI:     Thin out the picture and make it into con-
                 densed emptiness several times, until the
                 charge on the picture feels neutralized.

    Step VII: Realize who did all of the condensing and
               thinning out of emptiness.



    Step VII is very important, because as you realize that you are
condensing emptiness into a picture or memory in present time, you
can stop condensing it.

Principle: Once the quantum field or emptiness condenses itself
down, an experience and an experiencer are formed.

     To understand this more completely in Quantum Psychology,
imagine you have a memory of Dad doing something bad to you:
Dad and the little boy/girl are not here in present time, i.e., Dad is
not in the room. The picture (condensed emptiness) is being held by
you, the observer, in present time. From a Quantum Psychology
perspective, in order for you to let go of an unpleasant event or
situation that is being held in the quantum field, you must experi-
ence that you are holding the memory there. In modem psychology,
the story or picture has the power, as if it had a life of its own.
Without blame or shame, a goal of Quantum Psychology is for you
to experience that you are holding and condensing emptiness into
a picture or memory. When this is experienced, you can stop
organizing emptiness into a memory, which allows the condensed
emptiness to go back to its original form, which is emptiness or the
quantum field.
    Repeat the process and ask yourself, "Who is making the
emptiness condense into part-(icles) (memory), and who is making
the memory (part-ides) thin out and be emptiness?" Or stated
another way, once you have ice (the picture) and realize that you
froze the water (emptiness), you can stop freezing the water into ice.
What happens? It goes back to water (its original form).
   Once again, I need to emphasize that there is no blame nor
shame in what local condensations (memories) have emerged in the
                                              Tiie Living Void - 171
quantum field (emptiness). Our intention is to merely "see" them
with a quantum lens with no judgement nor evaluation attached.
This does not mean judgement and evaluation are bad and you
should "get on your own casef  " i they are present. There are no
"shoulds" involved with this. The suggestion is to see the judging
part-(icle) as condensed emptiness too.
     l hope you know that it's you who is condensing and thinning
out the quantum field. Hence, you are beyond the conflict and the
observer/creator and organizer of emptiness becoming form and
form becoming emptiness.