This understanding in physics must be experienced and known
directly, however. The purpose of the exercises and all the trainings
and seminars we give called Quantum Psychology" is not to add
another belief system, but rather to make available approaches that
provide an experiential knowingness of what physics has already
proven.
    Furthermore, the bubbles mentioned by Wheeler are likened to,
and similar to, the part-(icles) or I-dentities. Often people in
workshops experience these I-dentities as bubbles floating in emp-
tiness. Once the emptiness and the bubble or part-(icle) are seen as
the same, the nothingness or what Wheeler calls the "building
block" of existence remains. The nothing becomes a something
(when condensed), the something (condensed nothing) becomes
nothing when thinned-out or de-constructed. This is talked about by
Lama Goumda,
                                                          The Living Void - 187
     "The relationship of form and emptiness cannot be con-
     ceived as a state of mutually exclusive opposites, but only
     as two aspects of the same reality, which coexist and are in
     continual cooperation." (Govinda, 1974:223)

     What Wheeler says is, "nothingness is the building blocks of
the universe."The emptiness is made of the same substance as part-
icles be it a feeling or thought or emotion, etc. They are all one and
the same. Now to go back to the comment, "I feel empty and
depressed." People put judgements, evaluations, and decisions on
what the experience of emptiness means, like it is "not good" or it
means "I'm empty or depressed." These are labels that are tacked
on to pure emptiness. Without a judgment or decision as to what the
emptiness means, only ISNESS remains
     Recently, I was working with a client who was continually
trying to fill up the empty void she felt inside, she labeled it
"unwanted". By trying to fill up this empty void, she was resisting
that empty space. As we began to "do therapy," she began to
experience that the emptiness was always there and it was what
everything came from and went back to. In her words, "My whole
perception has changed. I feel comfortable and at peace." A week
later she said,"Where were you twenty years ago when Iwas taking
drugs. This is better than drugs." Another client complained of
compulsive over-eating. I saw that she was resisting emptiness and
was trying to "fill it up" with food. This is very common for over-
eaters, the resistance to emptiness. Interestingly enough, Buddhists
often say that our greatest resistance is to "nothing."*
     If you are feeling the emptiness is "not okay," then notice the
labelor judgment you have about it, and realize that it is just a label,
not who you really are. Then see the label and the part-icle and the
emptiness as made of the same substance.
     The other day, I was working with a depressed man. I asked
him,"How do you experience the depression?" He said,"As empty,
void, nothingness." The client labeled the void as depression. A
week later a Buddhist friend of mine said, "I just want to experience
the bliss of the VOID." He labeled the void as bliss. I laughed
because I realized that half of the people I know are trying to get into

*This will be discussed in my next book, The Tao of Chaos: Quantum Consciousness Vol.
//.. i.e., the personality types of the enneagram organizes around essence in the body.
188 - Quantum Consciousness
the void, the other half are trying to get out of the void. It's all in
the labeling.
     Another workshop participant said, "What about enlighten-
ment?"I replied by saying,"In Buddhist terms, the ultimate is called
Nirvana, and this world is called samsara. Buddha realized, that
since the emptiness was the same as the form that surrounds us, or
as Einstein said, "Everything is emptiness and form is condensed
emptiness," then to see one as different from the other, would be to
not see what was there. To paraphrase the Buddha, a person seeking
the ultimate (Nirvana) is ignorant; a person seeking the world
(samsara) is ignorant.
   Since emptiness and form are the same, then to seek one and
oppose the other, would be not to understand the nature of the
universe; or to see only the explicate order of separation and not the
implicate or quantum unity. This leads to Buddha's historic state-
ment,

    "Nirvana (the ultimate) is samsara,
     Samsara (the world) is nirvana."

Whittaker, a noted physicist says it this way,
    "In Einstein's conception, space is no longer the stage on
    which the drama of physics is performed; it is itself one of
    the performers." (Whittaker, 1948)

    Where then does that leave enlightenment? Possibly, it is just
another concept surrounded by emptiness.
    Finally, one student remarked, "This leaves me with no model,
nothing to find out who I am."
    I responded by quoting an Indian teacher I worked with: "In
order to find out who you are, I must liken it to a pole vaulter going
over the bar, in order to go over to the other side, you must let go of
the pole, in the same way, you must let go of your concepts and
models of reality."
    This leads us into the next chapter. Now that we have the
emptiness in front of us, who are we?
Nine

                        Going Beyond
                                       Ordinary
                                             Reality
   Thus far we have moved from witness to creator and from creator
to its relationship to energy, space, mass, and time. In this chapter
we will deal with (1) getting beyond the observer/creator of expe-
rience and (2) the discovery that the observer/creator and its
creation, (the part-(icle)) I-dentity called, "I hate myself"', or the
part-(icle) l-dentity called "I love myself', "I am angry", etc.) is
made of the same essential substance as the observer.
    But for now first things first: the experience that you are beyond
the creator/observer.




                                 189
190 - Quantum Consciousness

                          Level 7
                 The observer is the observed.



            Quantum Exercise 55

   To be done in pairs.

   Before doing exercises, we should probably s-t-r-e-c-t-h
   our Quantum muscles to warm-up.

   Quantum warm-up stretches: going beyond the observer
   who creates reality.

   Break down into groups of two. One person designates
   himself as Person A, the other as Person B. Person A
   faces Person B.

   1. Person A asks: Tell me a difference between you
       and your mind.

       Person B: responds. (Keep asking for ten minutes.)
       Then change sides and Person B will ask the same
       question of Person A.

   (Reverse)

   2. Person B: Tell me a difference between you and
       your body.

       Person A: responds.

   (Reverse)
                        Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 191
3. Person A: Tell me a difference between you and
   awareness.

    Person B: responds.

(Here, awareness is used to denote the medium you use
to become aware of something.)

This approach can be used in working with oneself.
Let's say for example, if a thought, feeling, emotion,
picture, etc. pops-up for you; by immediately asking
yourself, "What is the difference between me and the
thought or emotion,"you can begin to observe by seeing
a separation. Since you are the observer of it, it is Not
You.



        Quantum Exercise 56

To be done in pairs

The last group of exercises are warm-ups. The next
jump is to move us to being aware of the observer. Since
we can be aware of the observer and the creator, we are
beyond the observer and creator. Once again, "Any-
thing that you know about cannot be you" (Alfred
Korsybski). If this could be put simply, we are asking
you to be aware of being aware, or be aware of the
observer.

This exercise is done in pairs. One person designates
themselves person A, the other person B.

Person A: Tell me a difference between you and the
observer.

Person B: Responds
192 - Quantum Consciousness
    After ten minutes, change sides, and person B asks, person
    A responds.

    Person A: Tell me a difference between you and the
    observer of feelings.

    Person B: Responds.

    After ten minutes, change sides, and person B asks, person
    A responds.

    Person A: Tell me a difference between you and the
    observer of thoughts.

    Person B: Responds

    After ten minutes, change sides, andperson B asks, person
    A responds.

    Person A: Tell me a difference between you and the
    observer of sensations.

    Person B: Responds.

    After ten minutes, change sides, andperson B asks, person
    A responds.