Dr. Stephen Wolinsky has created one of the most interesting
and stimulating psychologies since Abraham Maslow.
    Ever since I wrote my study of Maslow, New Pathways in
Psychology, in 1970, I have been a fascinated spectator of the slow
de-freudianization of psychology. First came Viktor Frankl's
existenz-psychologie, which emerged from his experience in Nazi
death camps, and was bascd on the recognition that man's mental
and physical health depends upon his sense of purpose. At around
the same time, English and American readers became aware of the
Zurich schoolof existenz-psychologists,led by Ludwig Binswanger,
who emphasized the need for the psychoanalyst to get 'inside' the
patient's neurosis, and stop importing his own prejudices. The
starting point of Assagioli's 'psychosynthesis' was the recognition
that man possesses a central core of being, a 'self', and that by
recognizing his own creative potentialities, man can develop 'to-
wards the Superconscious.' Maslow also decisively rejected Freud's
mechanistic vision of man, and spoke of 'higher ceilings of human
consciousness.' For me, the essence of experiences', those sudden
flashes of strength and sheer happiness that are characteristic of all
healthy people. Carl Rogers recognized the central importance of
self-esteem, anidea that was also ingeniously developed by Nathaniel
Branden.
     There is a sense in which all these developments are a return to
the observation made by William James in a little book called On
Vital Reserves (1900), in which he pointed out that 'the human
individual. ..lives usually far within his limits; he possesses powers
xii
of various sorts which he habitually fails to use', and identifies
man's central problem as 'an inveterate habit of inferiority to our
full self.' So while Freud was trying to prove that man was far more
helpless than we assume, James and his successors were trying to
demonstrate that man is far stronger than he realizes, and that the
cure of his neuroses depends upon him learning to recognize this.
      In my own view, one of the most interesting of recent develop-
ments is the technique of 'focusing' developed by Eugene T.
 Gendlin. This consists basically of teaching the patient to look
 inside himself and to try to 'focus' the essence of his unhappiness
 and express it in words. While this clearly has something in
 common with Freud's 'talking cure', it is also a technique that
 comes naturally to every writer—particularly to the poet: learning
 to pour out his problems on paper, as to expel them from his system.
      All of which demonstrates that there is no such thing as
 'originality' in psychology. Psychology is, after all, the science of
 the human soul, and evuyone who is capable of accurate observa-
tion will inevitably recognize the same fundamental truths.
      What strikes me as so interesting about Stephen Wolinsky is
that he began approaching these truths in the same spirit as so many
of the 'religious Outsiders' I wrote about in my first book.' He
admits to having been a 'workshop junkie', and to spending six
years studying in India, and then anothertwelve years in meditation
three times a day. It is obvious that, like St. Augustine, Jacob
Boehme, George Fox, Blaise Pascal, Sri Ramakrishna, he found the
issue of 'personal salvation' a matter of almost physical urgency.
And eventually, his self-observation led him to recognize that 'the
witness not only witnesses and is mind/'itlof what passes through the
mind and body, but it is also the creative source of it.' This is easy
enough to grasp if you simply rub your eyes vigorously, then close
the eyelids and try to observe the coloured shapes that float around.
Your own observation changes the shapes as you try to look atthem.
Husserl called his effect 'intentionality.' Stephen Wolinsky prefers
to speak of Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle, whereby the obser-
vation of sub-atomic events is influenced by the observer. And this
in tum led him to develop a technique for 'pulling beyond the
creating observer', and achieving what he calls the 'no-state state.'
He came to recognize the basic truth of Bohm's notion of an
                                                                    xiii
'implicate order' which lies behind phenomena, and which forms
an 'unbroken wholeness which connects us all.'
   Now what Dr. Wolinsky has uncovered here is the basic
mystical experience. It is described, for example, in Franklin
Merrel-Wolff's Pathways Through to Space: 'Then with eyes
open...I abstracted the subjective moment—the 'I AM' or Atman
element—from the totality of the objective consciousness mani-
fold. Upon this I focused. Naturally, I found what, from the relative
point of view, is Darkness and Emptiness. But I Realized It as
Absolute LightandFullness andthat/was That.' And this produced
in Merrel-Wolff what he calls the 'ambrosia quality', a feeling of
pure joy and freedom that lasted for days.
     So it could be said that the real problem of psychotherapy is to
uncover the deepest level of one's own identity, and to recognize
'That thou art' 'Tat tvam asi' The result is a sense of sheer ecstasy
and relief, freedom from the 'false self' that has entangled us like a
boa constrictor. Ramakrishna experienced this feeling when he
started to commit suicide by plunging a sword into his breast. Even
Graham Greene, one of the gloomiest writers of our time, experi-
enced something very similar when he played Russian roulette with
a revolver and the hammer clicked on an empty chamber. But
clearly this method is not to be recommended for general use.
     Then how can it be done? This is where Dr. Wolinsky reveals
the result of his twelve years of self-observation. He has devised a
series of exercises—and these form the substance of this remark-
able book—to enable any intelligent person to do 'work on himself'
and to achieve results.
    One very basic observation is that all our mental states consist
basically of forms of energy. We regard some forms—pleasure,
freedom—as good, and others—misery, guilt—as bad. But to
recognize them simply as forms of energy is to abstract the 'false
you' from the situation, and to remove the 'double bind.' In this
respect, I particularly recommend Chapter VIII—'The Living
Void', and the exercise called 'Einstein's Riddle', in which the
conflict (in this case, whether to stay in a relationship or abandon it)
is envisaged as particles in space, and then the space is seen as being
of the same substance as the particles (as Einstein has said.) The
result: 'the conflict disappears.'
xvi
      What is so refreshing about Wolinsky is the sense of a brilliant
mind enjoying its ability to solve problems. He is frank about his
own insights and how they came to him; he speaks with the
openness of a man who has nothing to hide. So quite apart from the
exercises, I found that the book itself is an exhilarating and therefore
therapeutic experience. Respondingto Wolinsky's zestas he grapples
with problems, the reader begins to run ahead of him and experience
a sense of his own freedom—what Buckminster Fuller meant when
he commented: 'I seem to be a verb.'
     Every psychotherapy is an attempt to 'map the soul.' Analo-
gies like Heisenberg's principle are simply a form of 'co-ordinate
system' that enables us to take our bearings. William James pre-
ferred to start from the analogy of vital reserves, seeing the soul as
a kind of battery that can get flat. Gurdjieff preferred the analogy of
sleep and the war against sleep. Frankl saw it as a problem of 'the
law of reverse effort.' What I find exciting about Wolinsky is that
he has proved once again that a good basic 'co-ordinate system' can
enable us to get to grips with the problem, and produce that healthy
sense of freedom, of the power of the human mind to solve any
problem. Like James, Frankl, Maslow, Rogers and Assagioli, he has
found a new and highly original way of making us aware of one of
the most paradoxical truths about human reality; that to say: 'lhave
freedom' is less accurate than to say: 'I am freedom.'



                                                         Colin Wilson




·The Outsider, 1956.
Prologue