For thousands of years, people have been attempting to discern the
nature of consciousness. As we bring this book to a close, it seems
appropriate to look at consciousness in general, and specifically
how it applies to Quantum Psychology.
    Consciousness has been defined as an ability to know distinc-
tions. Self-consciousness is consciousness of oneself orthe imaginaiy
distinction between subject (observer) and knowing object (self).
     Consciousness, from the perspective of Quantum Psychology,
can be defined in two ways. First, consciousness is that which
discerns distinctions. For example, you might say, "I am conscious
that you like television and I like reading." Here we have the
consciousness to notice the difference between me liking television
and you liking reading. Secondly, I am conscious that reading is
different from television. In both cases there is consciousness of
232 - Quantum Consciousness
contrasts or distinctions, i.e, the you reading being different from
the you watching television. As mentioned in chapter IX and X,
without contrasts there could be no experience. Consciousness is
creative because consciousness is that which lets us know of
contrasts, distinctions, and Bohm's explicate order. What con-
sciousness does not let us know is Bohm's implicate order (the
underlying unity). Why? Because where consciousness is, the unity
cannot be seen; the function of consciousness is to see contrasts and
differences.
     A student came to Nisargadatta Maharaj and said, "I want to be
happy." Maharaj replied, "That's nonsense; happiness is where the
"I"isn't." He was saying thathappiness exists at the implicate level
where there is no consciousness just emptiness which knows no
distinctions or a separate "I" separation.
     Consciousness is where the "I" is, and consciousness is where
the distinctions of the explicate order take place. Consciousness
does not exist at an implicate level, because at an implicate level
there are no distinctions or contrasts, just pure lsness. This means
that what you call an individual self or "you" can never know the
underlying unity, because the underlying unity doesn't have con-
sciousness of a "you" separate from something to be known or to
know about. What is consciousness? Condensedemptiness. There-
fore, to know consciousness as condensed emptiness and emptiness
as thinned-out consciousness is to know the non-dual (implicate),
dual (explicate) nature of the universe. Simply put, ultimately, the
implicate is the explicate, the explicate is the implicate.
     A French psychiatrist came to Nisargadatta Maharaj and began
a long-winded question about past lives, future lives, karma, credits
and debits, etc. I don't remember this gentleman's question com-
pletely, but I do remember Maharaj's answer. "Who told you that
you exist?" Maharaj asked. The French psychiatrist looked at his
wife; his wife looked at him but remained silent. Maharaj said,
"Consciousness told you you exist, if you understand just this, it's
enough."
     Once again, he was re-stating the definition of consciousness as
that which knows distinctions orthe explicate order. Consciousness
is the observer and observed, knower and known, experiencer and
experience. Without consciousness to know distinctions, there
would just be the implicate order of quantum lsness. Therefore,
                                               Consciousness - 233
consciousness tells you you exist as a separate self. The concept of
existence or non-existence does not arise or exist in emptiness
only in consciousness. It can then be said,consciousness is condensed
emptiness, and emptiness is undifferentiated consciousness; (i.e.,
consciousness without distinctions).


          Quantum Contemplation
    Could there be an experience if there were no conscious-
    ness or that which knows the experience?



                Quantum Exercise 77
    Step I:      Let your eyes close,and see the emptiness in
                 front of you.

    Step II:     Allow the emptiness to condense and organ-
                 ize itself into the concept of consciousness
                 by adding the idea of distinctions and con-
                 trasts. Allow the empty space to condense
                 and organize itself into the concept called
                 "creating"

    Step Ill:    Allow this newly formed idea of conscious-
                 ness to do and create what it creates.



    Often in workshops, people feel as though they were left with
nothing or emptiness. This quantum jump allows us to view the
nothing and the something as the same.


          Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate the emptiness is thinned-out something, and
    the something is condensed emptiness.
234 - Quantum Consciousness

                 The Emptiness is Alive
     The good news from this understanding is that itleaves us with
total possibility, since we (condensed emptiness) can actually never
know what will come or go or, more simply, what emptiness will
condense into and appear and what form or experiences will thin-
out and disappear. The bad news is that for some of us who like order
and control this can be disconcerting. As was mentioned briefly in
Chapter II, it is the resistance to randomness, chaos, etc. that causes
so many of our problems. Stated another way, systems and models
of consciousness are created as a way of resisting randomness.*
Even Albert Einstein, a major architect of quantum mechanics, and
a NobelPrize winner, went to his grave unable to accept what he had
proven. Einstein's "God does not throw dice with the universe,"
underscores his inability to accept "randomness" and his resistance
to chaos.
     We must appreciate that consciousness which is condensed
emptiness is emptiness. More importantly, emptiness cannot know
itself. Consciousness, therefore, is the way emptiness knows itself
     "Consciousness creates Reality." (Herbert, 1985:24)

Eugene Wignor, noted physicist, says,
     "It is not possible to formulate the laws of quantum me-
     chanics in a fully consistent way without reference to
     consciousness... It will remain remarkable in whatever way
     our future concepts develop, that the very study of the
     external world led to the conclusion that the content of
     consciousness is the ultimate Reality." (Herbert, 1985:25-
     26)
Re-stated, consciousness is the way you can formulate a self which
can say there is an ultimate reality. If there is no consciousness and
just emptiness there is no ultimate reality because there is no
 separate individual to say there is an ultimate reality.
     Here is testimony to what I have called the "quantum force." A
force or idea contained within emptiness, made of emptiness itself

*This will be the total topic of my forthcoming book The Tao of Chaos: Quamum
Consciousness Volume //. The book deals with the new science of Chaos and its relationship
to psychology.
                                               Consciousness - 235
is the vehicle or medium of emptiness, to know itself: conscious-
ness. It is this quantum force or consciousness (which is made of
emptiness) which constructs and de-constructs thoughts, feelings,
emotions, and even the "I" we call ourselves in a random way.

Principle: Consciousness is condensed emptiness and is the cre-
ative vehicle of emptiness. In quantum terms, the quantum force,
which is a condensation of the quantum field, is the creative vehicle
of the quantum field.

     An observer who observes differences and distinctions, is still
consciousness observing consciousness or consciousness observ-
ing itself.

Principle: Since consciousness is condensed emptiness and is the
creative aspect of emptiness, then consciousness is emptiness.
Therefore, consciousness can never lose or find itself.


            Quantum Contemplations
    Contemplate the you who observes is made of conscious-
    ness.


    Contemplate the object (thought, feeling, etc.) is made of
    consciousness.

    Contemplate the subject observer is made of the same
    consciousness as its object (thought or feeling).

    Contemplate you are consciousness whether you are aware
    of it or not. This is quantum consciousness.

    Contemplate that bondage is just a thought construct, or an
    idea, or a belief or condensed emptiness. (Singh, 1979:24)

   Contemplate freedom is just a concept or condensed emp-
   tiness. (Singh, 1979:24)
236 0 Quantum Consciousness



                Quantum Exercise 78
    To be read out loud by a rotating groupfacilitator.

    (eyes closed)

    Step I:      See the emptiness in front of you.

    Step II:     Allow the emptiness to condense slightly
                 and create the idea of consciousness.

    Step Ill:    Allow the newly formed concept of con-
                 sciousness to create the idea of losing itself
                 and finding itself.

    Step IV:     Pretend you are that consciousness trying
                 to be found.

    Step V:      Pretend you're not pretending to be the lost
                 consciousness trying to be found.

    Step VI:     Pretend you are thelost consciousness wh ich
                 is found and enlightened.

    Step VII: Turn your attention around and notice the
               emptiness that has done all of that.

    Step VIII: Contemplate "I AM THAT undifferenti-
               ated consciousness."


    The beauty of developing this quantum awareness is, that
everything is seen as the same rather than different than everything
else. Modem psychology, has developed a system focusing on
individual differences, whereas, Quantum Psychology offers a
view of the world as a whole, unified, connected field.
                                              Consciousness - 237
    How can this aid us in our journey through life? Let's explore
several other quantum exercises and see how using them can help
us feel more connected and alive.


             Quantum Exercise 79

    Information not only appears in me, but allobjects have
    information. (Singh, 1979:94-95)

    Practice

    Group facilitator.'