Let your eyes close. Focus your attention on your skin
    boundary, your physical skin boundary. I'd like you to
    experience and focus your attention on your skin as
    though it were solid, as though it were a solid mass. As
    you focus your attention on your skin as though it were
    solid, notice its texture, what it's made out of. Notice
    how it feels and looks.

    Next, contemplate that there is nothing but space inside
    it. As you feel the solidness and see how it looks, contem-
    plate that there's nothing but space inside it. Very
    gently, bring your awareness back to the room.



   One workshop participant said, "Just seeing inside as empty
space really quieted my mind down." I replied, "All the exercises
are attempts to open up a new eye of perception and a new
possibility."
    In Chapter IV, we had exercises in which the skin boundary is
                                    Space: The Final Frontier - 155
experienced as energy. In this chapter, let's explore the space aspect
of the skin boundary.

    "There are two views of space. One view is to say the skin
    boundary of ourselves, saying there's the space without and
    the space within. The space within is the separate self,
    obviously, and the space without the space that separates
    the separate selves. To overcome that separation, you must
    have a process of moving through t hat space. (David Bohm,
    The Enfoldi'ng-Unfolding Universe: a Conversation with
    David Bohm).

    Using David Bohm's suggestion, lets look at two more quan-
tum exercises as ways to overcome separation.


               Quantum Exercise 43
     Step I:     Let your eyes close,and feel your skin bound-
                 ary like a wall. (Singh, 1979:43-44)

    Step II:     Contemplate the space within the wall.

    Step Ill:    Contemplate and experience the wall as
                 made of the same space as the space inside.

    After a few moments, gently, bring your awareness
    back to the room.




               Quantum Exercise 44

    The universe as space.

    Step I:      Let your eyes close again and experience
                 your skin boundary as solid and mass-like.
156 - Quantum Consciousness

   Step II:    Experience the space inside this mass-like
               structure called the skin-boundary.

   Step Ill:   Next, experience the space outside the mass-
               like skin-boundary.

   Step IV:    Now, experience the space inside the mass-
               like skin-boundary,the skin-boundary,and
               the space outside the skin-boundary as all
               being the same space.




              Quantum Exercise 45

   The space of the body.

   Step I:     Imagine your physical body as empty space.
               (Singh, 1979:43)

   Practice (eyes closed)

   Group facilitator:

   Focus your attention on your physical body as though it
   were empty space. Imagine your skin, your flesh, your
   body, and bones as empty space. With your eyes closed,
   enjoy the experience of your body as empty space.

   After several minutes, gently feel your body, feel where
   it is, notice your breathing, and very gently, bring your
   awareness back to the room. When you're ready, let
   your eyes open.
                                      Space: The Final Frontier - 157
     A student commented,"I was experiencing that everything is a
 manifestation of something else, and that I am space. It was as if the
 space was there, and I didn't have to do anything. It was a relief."


               Quantum Exercise 46
     Step I:      Get in touch with the space "inside."

     Step ii:     Look at objects in the room, and imagine
                  them as particles floating in empty space.


    This exercise offers us the opportunity to slip on the "quantum
lens," and view the spacious world and what we call objects as
 particles, with no boundaries no definitions, floating in empty
 space. This exercise can be done eyes open, not blinking, and by
µlling your attention backward as in Quantum Exercise 34. It is
important to notice that if we look at the world from "back there,"
prior to thoughts, impressions, or knowledge of an object or
ourself—the space becomes more available and boundaries disap-
pear. Why? Because we are looking without using our memory or
mind—we are just looking. The memories, which are accumulated
pictures of the world and ourself puts boundaries and "freezes" the
subjective experience of ourself and the world. Looking without the
mind, moves us outside the concepts of energy, space, mass and
lime—hence no boundaries!
     One student said, "At first it was difficult, but as I allowed
myself to open up to the possibility, I was able to do it."
     Another workshop participant said,"lt was difficult for me, too,
but as I allowed it, I could see the space, even with eyes open. What
was awesome was that there were times where the space was so
pervasive I couldn't tell if my eyes were open or closed."
     Here, I am including comments that support the exercise. It is
a difficult practice, but one need only to consider, permit, be willing,
or allow this "quantum lens" to slip on as a possibility.
158 - Quantum Consciousness



          Quantum Exercise 47
   The space in all directions. (Singh, 1979:41)

   This exercise is done in a group, with one group member
   leading, as a guide.

   Possible format for a group facilitator.

   (Eyes closed)

   Feel your body being supported, and notice your breath
   rising and falling. With eyes closed, focus on the space
   above you as though outer space were d irectly above
   you. Focus your attention on the space above you. Keep
   your attention on the space above you. Now, focus your
   attention on the space below you. Focus your attention
   on the void below you. Continue to focus your attention
   on the void below you. Now, focus your attention on the
   space just to the right of you. Focus your attention on
   the void just to your right. Now, I'd like you to focus
   your attention on the space on the left. Now, focus your
   attention on the space in front of you, almost as though
   you're looking into the space; and focus all of your
   attention on the void in front of you, completely in front
   of you, almost as if you're sitting on the edge, looking
   into space.

   In one gesture, let the space be simultaneously in front
   of you, behind you, above you, below you, and in all
   directions, inside of you and outside of you, in all
   directions. Let everything be space all at once, simulta-
   neously in all directions, everything as a void. Continue
   to focus your attention on the space extending in every
   direction, all at once, simultaneously.
                             Space: The Final Frontier - 159



           Quantum Exercise 48

Merging space.

(Eyes closed.)

Step I:     Notice the space below you.

Step II:    Notice the space to your left.

Step Ill:   Notice the space to your right.

Step IV:    Notice the space above you.

Step V:     Notice the space outside your body.

Step VI:    Notice the space inside your body.

Step VII: See the inner and outer space as the same
          space.

Group facilitator:

Take this space that is surrounding your body and
notice the empty space inside your body. Notice how the
empty space inside the body is the same as the empty
space outside the body. Now, allow the inner space and
outer space to merge, so that all that is left is space.

With you as the observer or witness of space, realize
that you determine what you call inside ofyourseVand
what you call outside yourseVby decision. Also, notice
what you call you and what you call not you is a
subjective decision. Notice, that since you are the ob-
server of space, you are not in space, but outside of
space.
160 - Quantum Consciousness
    Notice your breath, letting it come up to your chest just
    a little bit, and then feel your body being physically
    supported by the couch, the seat, by the floor. And very
    gently, whenever you're ready, let your eyes begin to
    open.



      One student commented, "I felt like I and everything else was
just space."
      Another participant said, "It was difficult at first, and my mind
did not want to get it, but, as I went along with your words, I felt like
all there was, was space."
      What is the importance, of seeing particles and energy moving
through space?

    "Our objective reality is composed of a void full of pulsat-
    ing fields. If we stop the pulsation of the fields, we get back
    to the absolute. (Bentov, 1977:67).

                         Conclusion
    These exercises, which can be done in a group, in pairs, or on
your own, can open the possibility of becoming aware of a world of
interconnected space. This space, once acknowledged, can become
a constant recognition of the space in which we all live, a major
quantum jump, our next quantum jump in the relationship between
the space and the apparent energy or particles we call ourselves.
Eight

                         THE LIVING
                                                       Void
    Turn off your mind relax and float down stream ... it is not
    dying, it is not dying..Lay down all thought surrender to
    the void ... it is shining, it is shining.
                                                 John Lennon