The wave-like image in the illustration calls to mind one of the
pivotal questions that plagued quantum physics in the 1920s: Is
matter (electrons) made of particles or waves? It seemed made of
both. In 1924 physicist de Broglie proposed a revolutionary concep-
tion: that electrons possessed a dual nature; that they could be both
a wave and particle. In this illustration, the process of thoughts as
they arise and subside appears in wave-like form, but it should also
be noted that when you merge with a particular thought or emotion,
it becomes more part-(icle)-like. In the tradition of Yoga, Patangali's
                           Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 39
division between subject and object in order to answer it. You have
to separate from a thought in order to watch it and notice where it
ends or subsides and another thought begins. This separation
automatically lessens your identification with the thought. Why is
it valuable to separate the subject from the object? Why is it valuable
to learn how to observe? Because anything you identify with will
 limit you.
       Certainly there are many things you don't mind being limited
 by: your preference for certain types of women or men is something
 you enjoy, and you don't experience it as a limitation. Many
 identifications, however, will cause some discomfort. For one
 thing, since the nature of the mind is one of continual fluctuation (it
 is the nature of the mind to change its mind!), the object of your
 identifications can change so fast you end up lamenting, "I don't
 know what I want!" One minute you like your job, the next minute
 you don't. One week you are satisfied with your relationship, the
 next you feel restless and discontent. If you fall madly in love today,
 you know that within the month, you will feel differently. The
 fluctuations we experience in our thinking, feeling, in our physical
 sensations, in our emotional responses are sometimes dizzying in
 magnitude. The one source of constancy, bringing a sense of
equilibrium and continuity, can be this observer, this witnessing
presence, that is always there.
       One thought common to every living person at some point in
 life is "I'm afraid." To be consumed by the thought/feeling "I'm
afraid" means to identify with it, to say, "Yep, that's me, I'm
afraid." Usually, one fearful thought leads to a train of fearful
thoughts:
      "I'm afraid I'll lose my job."
      "I'm afraid I won't have enough money."
       "I'm afraid I'll get cancer."
      "I'm afraid s/he'll leave me and I'll be all alone."
      As you observe the first thought arise, "I'm afraid I'll lose my
job," and ask yourself the question, "to where does that thought
subside?", you'll probably find that the beginnings of your own
personal story begin to pop into your thoughts.
      "I've never been able to hold onto a job... not even as a teenager
doing trivial part-time work...my father always said I had no
perseverance."
40 - Quantum Consciousness
    Once the thread of the storyline is clear, realize that, in essence,
you've said to yourself, "That's me—l have no perseverance
that's just how I am."
    The only thing that gives a thought power to affect you in any
way is the fact that you have identified with it. Thinking "I have
green skin" won't affect you because it is so blatantly not you, there
is nothing to hook into. By contrast, thinking "I have no persever-
ance" has a hook for you in your previous experience. As a
psychological process, identification is like glue in that, when you
use it, things (thoughts, emotions, sensations) stick to you.
    In a workshop, one student commented after doing the exercise,
"There was so much space that words didn't make a lot of sense.
And before I could ask about the thought it was gone and there was
space. It's weird because I couldn't remember the thought, only the
space." Another trainee commented at a workshop, "Things don't
seem to have the same weight anymore."
    In practicing the exercise of Level 1, you create the possibility
of having a new experience of non-identification, a glue-free
moment of emptiness or openness, a point of experiential silence.
Experiencing the emptiness from which everything arises and to
which everything subsides is the beginning of Quantum Conscious-
ness.
               Quantum Exercise 3

    Separating the observer from the observed.

              From where does that thought arise?

    When a thought arises, ask "From where does that
    thought arise?

    When we continually ask ourselves, "From where does
    that thought arise?" we soon learn that a thought arises,
    and subsides, and then there is a space, after each
    thought.
                            Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 41
    This Quantum exercise is similar to the previous one, "to
where does this thought subside." In the last exercise we are asked
to find the empty-space after the arising of a thought. In this exercise
we are asked to notice the empty-space (implicate) prior to the
arising of a thought. One workshop participant asked me, "Why so
many similar exercises since all you really need is one." I replied,
"Not every exercise will work for you or anyone else. If I offer a
menu, you can pick and choose the ones that work and discard the
rest."jokingly I said,"Today's specialis to where does this thought
subside, it's garnished with the witness, and smothered in the
implicate order."
    Many years ago, I was working with Nisargadatta Maharaj, an
Indian teacher. He asked a woman who was audio taping for a new
book, "What will be the name of my next book." She replied,
"Beyond Consciousness." He said, "no, Prior to Consciousness.
Find out who you are prior to your last thought and stay there."
    "From where does that thought arise?" brings us back to that
space so that we can witness the rising and subsiding of each
thought.
     A common experience is to wake up in the morning; a thought
comes by your awareness called "I feel good," and the witness says,
"That's me." Your mind willthen start coming up with reasons why
you feel good: "I feel good because I got a lot of sleep; I feel good
because I didn't sleep vuy much; I feel good because I meditated
this morning; because I had a lot for dinner; because I didn't have
a lot of dinner." Around noon a thought will come by which says,
"I'm tired," and you'llrespond,"That's me.""Why do Ihave to go
to work? It's such a drag. I knew I slept too much" or "I didn't sleep
enough," or whatever the sequence of events you might be experi-
encing. Sound familiar? A thought arises and subsides, and there's
a space. This is the way it functions—it arises and it subsides, and
there's space.
    The purpose of this Quantum exercise is to bring you back into
the space between thoughts. If there's anything that you identify
with, it will limit you. "I like blue shirts, I like red shirts, I like tall
women, I like short women," whatever it may be. Whatever you
believe will limit you, or you could say anything that you identify
with or feel attached to, will eventually lead to a contracted and
limited experience of oneself.
42 - Quantum Consciousness
    Webster defines contemplation as "to look at or view with
continued attention; observe thoughtfully, to consider or reflect
upon." Throughout the book, when I use the word contemplate I
mean "to consider and reject".


          Quantum Contemplation
    Look into yourexperience and ask yourself, "Who is it that
    is always witnessing my mind? Who is it that is always
    there watching?" The answer is 'I am"