only our own idiosyncrasies that direct us to divide it up
    into such arbitrary categories as mind and body. Thus,
    consciousness cannotbe considered as fundamentally sepa-
    rate from matter, any more than life can be considered as
    fundamentally separate from non-life. There is not dualism
    because both are secondtuy and derivative categories and
    both are enfolded in a higher common ground." (Talbot,
    1987:53)

      The impact on these discoveries should have an impact upon
modern psychology.
      Many schools of psychology look to handling the past as a way
to solve the present problem. This is implied through most schools
of therapy. I should add that the purpose of this discussion is not to
criticize psychology or spiritual practice. Rather, the purpose is for
all of us to join hands in the development of a form of "inner work"
that includes the world of Quantum Physics.
    In Ericksonian hypnosis, a favorite technique is asking a
client's unconscious to see a future where the problem is already
resolved. Then the client is given suggestions to notice how they
handled the problem, taking back to the present resources from the
imagined future.
    In this type of work, the future is treated as now and can be
experienced that way in trance or my no-trance state. To illustrate
this, recently, I had a discussion over the phone with noted
Ericksonian therapist Stephen R. Lankton. Lankton not only ac-
knowledged Erickson's utilization of time but also said, "by putting
the imagined future in the present-time experience, we are putting
the 'how to change' of the future in the present." This means, that
we are putting the "alleged future in the present." This approach
often helps in problem resolution as we look past the limits of what
we normally construe as linear time. Dr. Milton H. Erickson, had
many approaches in shifting time around, that helped alleviate
problems that were being presented in his clinical practice. The
difference between Quantum Psychology and Erickson's work,
(although Erickson's work somehow acknowledges that the time is
more transparent, more fluid, more expandable than most forms of
therapy), is that Erickson is stilldealing with shifting problems and
creating identities. There is nothing wrong with creating identities
                                         The Concept of Time - 133

or changing problems or solving problems. The thing is, if you have
a problem called "intimacy", i.e., you cannot get too close to people
without feeling afraid, in the Erickson model, you would want to
develop some kind of resources or re-association. This would help
make it okay to be intimate. This means you are saying it is better
to be intimate than not intimate. That is a judgment. Quantum
Psychology merely notes that these are two particular things in
conflict, i.e. identity part-(icle) called "no intimacy" and identity
part-(icle) called "intimacy". Here, once again, I am using the word
part-(icle) because any experience can only occur if a part is viewed
as separate from the whole. Ultimately, these identities are part-
(ides) floating in empty space, and these part-(icles) are not floating
in empty space, because the space and the part-(icles) are the same
substance. (This will be discussed in later chapters.)
     Erickson's work acknowledges the fact that the future is taking
place right now just as the past is taking place right now. Erickson
attempts to somehow change the present, or use the future, into
something more acceptable now. What we are suggesting is moving
people beyond their identification with any particular problem
states, or part-(icle), so they can take responsibility for their own,
subjective creations, and stop creating them. This allows individu-
als to see the whole. Most psychology, however, separates past,
present, and future, and has not evolved a psychology on the
holographic model. This book attempts to bring a transformation to
psychology, so that the whole or quantum unity is acknowledged
and is viewed as acontext forthe parts. (More aboutthis in Chapters
IX and X.)
    How do we take the beginning steps to go beyond time? Let us
refer back to the last chapter, Getting to Zero.


    Step I:      Practice zero point and notice yourself as the
                 creator/observer. Watch the size and shape of
                 the part-(icle), belief or experience.

    Step II:      As you notice that emotion, thought, memory,
                 etc. inside the part-(icle), notice that the ob-
                 server that's watching is there and is actually
                 not in time, but that the part-(icle) appears to
134 - Quantum Consciousness
                exist in time. You, however, are outside time.
                Thoughts, emotions, memories, or part-(icles)
                are in time.


          Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate that since you can observe time, you are
    separate from and exist not intime. For example, notice that
    you feel that you have never changed. Or consider, that as
    you look in the mirror the person seems older, but you seem
    unchanged.



             Quantum Exercise 29

    Look into a mirror and be the observer. Notice that the
    person has changed in time. Notice that if you don't use
    your memory, you experience yourself as unchanged.


    Why is this phenomenon so widely reported? Because at some
level we feel ourselves as observers and as outside of, and unaf-
fected by, time. Furthermore, memory is in the context of time. If
we don't use our memory we experience ourselves out of time or in
a no-time space. This also explains why we have such a denial of
death. Since we, the observer, do not experience ourselves in time,
we do not fear time coming to an end.


          Quantum Contemplation
    Without using memory, thoughts, or associations are you in
    time, out of time, or neither?
                                        The Concept of Time - 135

           How to Remove Yourself
           from Time-Bound Beliefs
    Since time is a concept and is organized by you, the word time
in and of itself brings up countless beliefs. For example, "I never
have enough time," "there isn't enough time," "I am running out of
time," or "time is money." For some reason, we all, when you use
the word time make time a frozen experience, "as if" iime was not
a concept, and time was a fact and stationary, or a noun rather than
a verb. To loosen the parameters of time the following exercise has
been adapted.


             Quantum Exercise 30

    The concept of time.

    Since time is a concept, change the word "time" to the
    word "existence."

    The rotating group facilitator may use this format:

    As you begin to use this method, first look at the
    concepts of time that you have. Look at the concept of
    time and allyour beliefs about time. You can start with,
    "Time is        " and fill in the blanks. Keep repeating
    "Time is       " until you have a list of beliefs. Notice all
    of your concepts about time. Go back over your con-
    cepts of time, but change the word "time" to the word
    "existence." For instance, you might believe, "There
    isn't enough time for me." See what it does for your
    experience when you change the word "time" to the
    word "existence." For examp ie, rather than "there isn't
    enough time for me" you change it to, "there isn't
    enough existence for me.
136 - Quantum Consciousness
     Here are some comments I've received from students in my
workshops.
     "Well, I got a feeling that time is something that we invented to
ground us."
    "I got, 'time is short, and when you said change it to 'existence,'
existence is timeless, and I stayed on that for a long time."
     "I started flashing on Japan and the bullet train, and it's always
right on time. It's very important to the Japanese, but this bullet train
is always accurate, always on time. And I started thinking about all
of the watches that come out of Japan."
     "I found that the concept of time started out in an intellectual
place, and then I found that time is limiting, and I started feeling very
angry at the whole concept of time. And when I switched it to
existence, the anger went away."
    As we have already discussed, everything that appears, appears
to have a duration or beginning, a middle, and an end. For example,
if you feel sad, you can notice that the sadness had a beginning
(when it started), a middle (when it was most intense), and an end
(when it began to dissipate and go away). This can be likened to
what a Yogi might call, "creation, sustaining, and destroying." In
the Yoga tradition there are thousands of gods and goddesses, each
responsible for some aspect of consciousness: the creator (of an
experience) is called Brahma; the sustaining force, Vishnu, and the
destroyer, Shiva. What Hindus noticed along with quantum physi-
cists was that time was essential. Stated in Quantum Psychological
terminology:

Principle: Everything that appears in the physical universe has the
appearance of time (duration), a beginning, a middle, and an end.

    This is why Bohm sees time as a major aspect of consciousness.
If there were no time, there would be no time in which something
could exist.