"In each act of positioned knowing, there is a 'point of
    decision,' a vital 'zero point,' 'before' knowing is accom-
    plished." (Tulku, 1990:270).
   Here, Tarthang Tulku is suggesting that zero point is before
knowing and fusing with what is known. Zero point, in Quantum
Psychology is the knower and observer and exists at this level
                                               Getting to Zero 0 95
bt;fore the known. In quantum physics terms, the knower, through
the act of observation, creates what is known. In psychological
terms, the observer creates his/her experience through the creative
act of observation. Notice how Buddhism, psychology and physics
overlap in Quantum Psychology to help understand how subjective
reality is constructed.
    Once the observer creates and fuses with athought, he/she loses
the ability to see that the part-(icle) belief has a boundary. Rather,
through identification with the labeled energy, the observer feels
boundaried, contracted and limited by his/her own created reality.
This experience is merely an extension of the self-created belief
system.
    We will explore next how to work with these perceived pan-
(ides) onemotionaland belief levels, and leamto identify boundaried
experiences versus spacious non-boundaried experiences, the latter
of which are more like the subatomic world of quantum physics. We
do acknowledge the boundaried world,but do choose to explore the
spaciousness of non-boundaried existence to create a larger context
in which to experience ourselves.
    When we look at our own experience, we can notice that when
we believe something is true, we feel it is true, and it becomes
subjectively true for us. Then, events in the world that seemingly
happen to us are interpreted and funneled through that belief
system. This reinforces the standard we have of the world and
ourselves. By judging our experience as good, bad, or neutral we
begin to solidify our own perceived realities. The more we continue
to access these realities and label them, we create more density and
mass in our thoughts and emotional patterns. Thus, the energy
becomes less fluid and more dense. This occurs in our subjective
perception, not in external reality. As David Bohm has suggested,
"everything interpenetrates everything else." In order to function in
the world, we categorize our experience, which breaks up the liquid
nature of consciousness. We believe the reality we create is the true
one. As this energy continues to be labeled, the belief in our internal
reality and its perceived nature solidifies.
    An old friend of mine once said, "Stephen, I feel you are this
way." I said, "I'm not." She said, "But I feel you are." She had
labeled me this particular way, and would and could not see beyond
her label. In cognitive therapy this is called "emotional reasoning."
96 - Quantum Conscioijsness
    "At the root of this distortion is the belief that what you feel
    must be true. If you feel like a loser, then you must be a
    loser." (Davis, 198 1:22).

    Here, my friend is labeling me and feeling herlabel; this denies
any new or other information from getting in, unless she can let go
of the label. I'm sure we can all identify with being labeled by
another to be a certain way, even if it's not true. How often have all
of us spent time really trying to explain we are different from the
way we are being labeled and perceived, only to be left frustrated,
feeling alienated, isolated and misunderstood.


                Quantum Exercise 20

    Step I:      Observe a belief. Pick beliefs about yourself
                 and notice them floating by.

    Step II:     See them as solidified part-(icles) of energy.

    Step Ill:    Practice stepping into and mergingwith the
                 part-(icle); notice how your experience
                 changes. The world generally seems denser
                 and more constricted when there is a fixed
                 belief about your world. We feel heavier.

    Step IV:     Step out of the belief or part-(icle) and
                 observe. Notice the alteration of your expe-
                 rience, perhaps a feeling of lightness,
                 non-attachment, or spaciousness. Also no-
                 tice this in the everyday world when you
                 interact with someone with fixed beliefs, or
                 when intense emotional states occur. Your
                 energy or spaciousness has a heavier den-
                 sity. When observing the part-(icle), there
                 will be more lightness or space. (Chapter
                 VII on space will discuss this further.)
                                                 Getting to Zero - 97
   To further understand, let's look at the same process from a
quantum viewpoint.


                Quantum Exercise 21

    See the energy of a belief called "nobody loves me," with
    boundaries. See how the energy solidifies as you label
    the experience, and it develops a part-(icle)-like and
    heavy, dense, mass-like structure. Follow these steps to
    have a more grounded understanding through this
    exercise.

    Step I:       Look at the energy again without judge-
                  ment.

    Step II:      Perceive a part-(icle) you believe or label
                  like "nobody loves me." Intentionally label
                  or believe it.

    Step Ill:     Notice that when you believe it, you identify
                  or fuse with it and feel less spacious.

    Step IV:      Now, step out of the part-(icle) and see how
                  your experience becomes more spacious,
                  when you see it as energy. (See illustration
                  #9).

    Notice as you label and separate the energy into a
    particular belief, there is less space. When you identify
    with the part-(icle), and experience yourself believing
    it, it becomes you. Your experience then is, "I am
    unlovable."



    The consequences of solidifying energy into a belief are feeling
heavier, denser, and also believing it as true. Hence, even if a partner
98 - Quantum Cosciusness


                    Illustration 9
                                               Getting to Zero - 99
is offering love, that energy cannot be taken in because the prior
created part-(icle) willnot allow it. It remains ablock to the present
reality or energy being offered. The part-(icle) now has boundaries
which are self-imposed and believed. That part-(icle) becomes your
experience of reality.


                 Regaining Choice
               Over Our Experience
    Our purpose in presenting zero point philosophy and tech-
niques is to allow people to have more choice over their beliefs and
experience. In order for this to occur, old beliefs need to be looked
at, and de-constructed. This allows for more space in conscious-
ness. As this occurs, people become aware that there is an observer
who is the creative source of beliefs, who determines how experi-
ences are interpreted or labeled. At this juncture we do not employ
a new belief system but rather allow the person to experience the
observer as the creative source of experience. In order to "get to
zero," the observer/creator must de-label and de-construct prior
created reality.
     Why would someone want to get to zero? Because at zero you
can just be and connect with people without the filters, beliefs, and
obstacles that keep popping up in our consciousness. These old
"pop-ups" (inner voices, old pictures and associations), prevent us
from just being in present time and connecting at a being to being
level, rather than through prior created structures.
    You might say that in most of our relationships we connect
through our roles. We often feel lonely and alienated because all our
stuff gets in the way. Zero point allows us to connect being to being.
At that level, there is no loneliness, no alienation.
     To re-state, Tarthang Tulku,

    "By standing in contrast to what is, Zero grants existence
    permission to be." (Tulku, 1990:271)

    Therefore, beliefs and experiences must be examined. Other
systems have presented theories regarding this issue. There are
opposing views in regard to the creation of belief,s and experience.
100 - Quantum Consciousness