AS we begin to move further along in our journey, we can
appreciate that in order for anything to exist in the physical universe,
it must have energy, occupy a space,have solidness, and have atime
(duration). What the last exercises were intended to do was to give
us an experience of being beyond the concepts of energy, space,
mass, and time. This provides us with a new pair of glasses, our
"quantum lens," so that we can pierce the apparent nature of the
physical universe, and discover our true nature.
   The question still arises then,"Who Am I?" But,as we bring the
answer to that question more and more into focus, we can notice that

                                  161
162 - Quantum Consciousness
we are the ones who are witnessing the energy, space, mass, and
time, and as mentioned in Chapter I, anything that you can observe,
you are separate from. To repeat the words of Alfred Korzybski,
"Anything you know about can't be you," or, "The map is not the
territory."


                            Level 6
                   You are beyond the aspects of
                   energy, space, mass, and time.


    Being the observer and the participator in the creation of
energy, space, mass, and time, brings us to another hilltop from
which to view reality. As Einstein demonstrated,

    "Everything is made of emptiness and form is condensed
    emptiness."
What does this mean? Well, before we go on to explore experien-
tially what it means, let us say that energy is the same as matter, and
that space is the same as matter, energy and time. Einstein proved,
that everything is made of the same substance; i.e.,emptiness being
form, form being emptiness. As mentioned in Chapter I, the
Buddhist Heart Sutra says it exactly the same way: "Form is none
other than emptiness, emptiness is none other than form."

    In Quantum Field Theory, the distinction between particles
    and space surrounding them loses its original sharpness,
    and the void is recognized as a dynamic quantity of para-
    mount importance. In Einstein's field equations, matter
    cannot be separated from its field of gravity, and the field
    of gravity cannot be separated from the curved space.
    Matter and space are thus seen to be inseparable and
    interdependent parts of a single whole. Modern physics
    shows us once again that material objects are not distinct
    entities but are inseverable links to the environment, that
    their properties can only be understood in terms of the
    interaction with the rest of the world. A quantum field is a
    field which can take the form of quanta or particles.
                                            The Living Void - 163
  Quantum field is seen as the fundamental physical entity,
  a continuous medium which is present everywhere in
   space." (Capek, 1961:319).
   Before we go into its far reaching effects, and offer exercises,
wanted to clarify that I will be using the terms "quantum field",
void", and "emptiness" as synonyms.


             Quantum Exercise 49
   Einstein's riddle.

   Step I:      Notice a conflict you are having, i.e., to stay
                in a relationship, not to stay in a relation-
                ship.

   Step II:     Notice the shape and size of each part of the
                conflict and the space that is in between
                them and in which they are floating.

   Step Ill:    Allow yourself to feel each part of the con-
                flict, by merging with each part-(icle).

   Step IV:     Merge with each shape, and then step be-
                tween each side of the conflict and merge
                with the space.

   Step V:      See the two part-(icles) (the conflicted parts)
                that are floating in space and the space that
                surrounds them as being made of the same
                substance.

   Step VI:     Notice what happens.
164 - Quantum Consciousness
    One student said, "The conflict disappeared." Another student
said, "The conflict lost its charge." A third student said, "The
opposition disappeared: I feel calm and peaceful like it's no issue
anymore."
    I responded to all three of the workshop participants by stating
a simple principle.

Principle: In order to have an experience or to experience anything,
there must be a contrast, or something different from something
else. To repeat Bentov again,
    "Our whole reality is constructed by constantly making
    such comparisons. Our senses which describe our reality to
    us are making these comparisons all the time. Unfortu-
    nately, our senses, having no absolute reference line, must
    generate their own relative reference line. But whenever we
    perceive something, we always perceive differences only,
    whether it be heat or cold, light or darkness, quiet or noisy,
    always compared to relative quantities. We have no abso-
    lute measure of anything, so far as our daily reality is
    concerned." (Bentov, 1977:22)
    What this means is that if everything is made of the same
substance, there can be no conflict. Why? Because, it is only when
something is imagined to be different than something else that a
conflict can exist.

    "Particles are merely local condensations of the field.
    Einstein said, We may therefore regard matter as being
    constituted by the regions of space in which the field is
    extremely intense. There is no place in this new kind of
    physics, both for the field and matter, for the field is only
    the matter." (Capek, 1961:3 19).

    The next question then is, how does this condensation occur?
To answer this let us move on to the next exercise.
                                        The Living Void - 165



           Quantum Exercise 50
Step I:     Notice a conflict you are having, i.e., to stay
            in a relationship, to not stay in a relation-
            ship.

Step II:    Notice the shape and size of each part of the
            conflict and the space that surrounds them
            and is in between them.

Step Ill:   Allow yourself to feel each part of the con-
            flict.

Step IV:    Merge with each shape, and then step be-
            tween each side of the conflict and merge
            with the space.

Step V:     See the two particles that are floating in
            empty space and the empty space as being
            made of the same substance.

Step VI:    Notice the emptiness that is left.

Step VII: Condense the emptiness and make particle
           1, "should I stay in this relationship," and
           condense some more emptiness and make
           particle 2,"I should not stay in this relation-
           ship."

Step VIII: Now, thin out these two particles and make
            them back into emptiness.
Step IV:    Condense emptiness making it into the parts
            in conflict and thin them out making them
            back into emptiness several times.
166 - Quantum Consciousness
    Seeing the part-(icles) and the empty space as being the same,
students have commented that the part-(icles) or conflict disappear.
Why? Because there are no contrasts. Now, by the quantum field or
emptiness condensing down and making a part-(icle) such as, "I
want a relationship," and then condensing itself down more and
making another part-(icle) called "I don't want a relationship," two
part-ides are created that you are imagining are separate and
different substances than the space which surrounds them and the
quantum field or emptiness they are made from. It would be like if
everything were made of snow (emptiness), and you made two
snowballs (part-(icles) and put them in snow, (emptiness). Then you
thinned out the snowballs and made them back into snow and did
this several times, making snowballs (condensed emptiness) and
thinning them back into snow, (emptiness). Another metaphor
would be taking water and freezing it into ice. The emptiness is the
water. The ice makes the two part-(icles), "I want a relationship"
and "I don't want a relationship." Are the ice and the water
different? Both are water. One is simply frozen water. They are the
same substance. In the same way, the emptiness is the water and the
ice, frozen emptiness, is the part-(icles), "I want a relationship" and
"I don't want a relationship."
    If we can view with a "quantum lens" the particles and the
empty space, and the snow and snowballs, as not separate and
distinct the conflict cannot exist. The conflict can only exist, if we
imagine and see contrasts.

    "In the same way, the Buddhists express the same idea
    when they call the ultimate reality sunnyata for emptiness
    or void and affirm that it is a living void which gives birth
    to all forms in the phenomenological world." (Capra,
    1976:198)