Feel, the freedom and lightness when you drop the idea of
cause. This eliminates the tremendous pressure of, thinking if
you're good, you'll get this or that, or you'll get this because you did
that."
    We use the term localcause, because it is impossible to reduce
the universe into this local event here, as the cause of that event
there. Everything causes everything else.
    "Bell's Theorem proves the principle of local causes must
    be false. However, if the principle of local causes fails and,
    hence, the world is not the way it appears to be, then what
    is the true nature of the world (or the mind)? There are
    several mutually exclusive possibilities: the first possibil-
    ity which we have discussed is that, appearance to the
    contrary, there really may be no such thing as separate parts
    in our world. In the dialect of physics, locality fails. In that
    case, the idea of events and autonomous happenings is an
    illusion. This would be the case for any separate parts that
    have interacted with each other at any time in the past. The
    possibility entails a faster-than-light communication of a
214 - Quantum Consciousness
    type different than conventional physics can explain. In this
    picture, what happens here is intimately and immediately
    connected to what happens elsewhere in the universe,
    which in turn is immediately and intimately connected to
    what happens everywhere in the universe, and so on,
    simply because separate parts of the universe are not
    separate pans." (Zukav, 1979:296)


    Location and separate parts, along with time (past, present and
future), can only exist in a world where different substances exist.
Since everything is made of the same substance, there can be no
separate parts, no location, and no past, present, or future. Why?
Because in order for location, separate parts, or past, present, and
future to exist there would have to be a separate self to say it was so.


              Bell's Theorem: Part 2
    The second part of Bell's Theorem states that there are no local
causes. The idea of no cause is also exemplified in one of Indias'
most ancient and well-regarded texts; The Yoga Vasistha.

    "a crow alights on a coconut palm tree and at that very
    moment a ripe coconut falls. The two unrelated events thus
    seem to be related in time and space, though there is no
    casual relationship... Such is creation. But the mind caught
    up in its own trap of logic questions why, invents a why and
    a wherefore to satisfy itself. Vasistha demands direct
    observation of the mind, its motion, its notions, its reason-
    ing, the assured cause and the projected results, and even
    the observer, the observed and the observation —and the
    realization of their indivisible unity as infinite conscious-
    ness. (Venkatesananda, 1976).

     Everything is made of the same quantum stuff, thus you could
not designate something causing something else. Certainly in
psychology, reducing down simple units of cause and effect seems
logical. The problem is that, this implies different substances. This
is imaginary, since everything is made of the same substance and is
everything else.
                                            The Last Voyage - 215
      Noted physicist, Dr. Feynman represents quantum stuff as a
sum of possibilities.

      "Everything that might have happened influences what
      actually does happen." (Herbert, 1985:52)
    Recently, in a workshop, a participant asked me, "what about
karma, the Asian concept of cause and effect? I have been to a
channel, who said, so and so happened in a past life, which is why
I am going through this in this Life, to balance the karma."I said
"since karma can be summed up as 'what you sow, so shall you
reap,' then this is true taken from a quantum perspective. If
everything is made of the same quantum stuff and you are every-
thing, and everything that happens is everything else, then what you
as everything sow, so shall you as everything reap." This can be
called Quantum Karma. Everything is everything else. Karma, as it
is presently interpreted, demands the illusion of separation and the
illusion of local cause A causing local effect B. This is comparable
to Newton's billiard ball A causing billiard ball B to move. Karma
is what is. From the world of a separate self, which is linear,
everything appears as cause and effect, Quantum Karma is just what
iS.
    In order to "experientially" understand Bell's Theorem, exer-
cises are provided. Let us remember, that, with a sub-atomic lens,
everything is made of the same substance, hence everything is the
same substance. Cause and effect implies that something is separate
and distinct from something else. If there are no distinctions, then
there is no cause and effect. When Bell says, "no local causes," he
is saying that everything is so connected to eveqthing else, that it
would be impossible to reduce the universe down into parts and
conclude "this caused that."
     In 1988,I had an opportunity to havelunch with noted physicist
Nick Herbert, whom I've quoted many times throughout the book.
At that time, I discussed with him the basic ideas of Quantum
Psychology", and, since, I'm not a physicist, I asked for "the nod,"
i.e., telling me what I was saying was true. When I got to Bell's
Theorem—no location and no local causes—Nick said, "It's the
most provable thing in quantum physics."

      "It wasn't until 1964 that John Bell, a physicist at the
      European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in
216 - Quantum Consciousness

    Switzerland, thought of a way in which an actual experi-
    ment might be set up to settle the matter once and for all. In
    a brilliant mathematical proof now known as Bell's Theo-
    rem, Bell showed that if quantum theory was correct, one
    had to accept at least one of two options—either the world
    was non-objective and did not exist in a definite state, or it
    was 'non-local,' with instantaneous action-at-a-distance. It
    was as simple as that." (Talbot, 1987:32).

    No local causes or no way to point to one particular thing as
causing something else is the essence of this view. This leaves us
without the eternal question, "Why?", because everything is made
of the same substance so there canbe no "Why?"—because not only
does "Why?" lose its charge, but also "Where?" because there is no
locally and there can be no "Where?", because location is relative
to position. This also eliminates "how?" which implies separation,
and "When?" since time is a concept left behind in Chapter VI.
    Let us now, see if we can make this understanding more
accessible through exercises. Once again, this, is a fifteen day
workshop in Quantum Psychology", and, as mentioned earlier, it
would be impossible to include everything in the confines of these
pages. We will however, present a highlighted overview to evoke
possibility and openness to this quantum unity.
   Let us explore this in terms of ourselves, and in the form of
exercises.


             Quantum Exercise 68

    Contemplate:

    That all information (knowledge) is without cause.
    (Singh, 1979:90)



    I'm going to use the words "knowledge" and "information"
interchangeably, so that either word will mean anything you know
about yourself orthe world. This is suggested because in the ancient
                                             The Last Voyage - 217
Sanskrit text the Siva Sutras the sutras refer to knowledge being
bondage, (pg. 16). Westerners confuse the word "knowledge" with
the Western concept that knowledge is value. Actually, what is
meant is, information you have about yourself is bondage because
all information you have about yourself limits you. For example, "I
am smart," or "I am ugly," or "I am stupid," are all information you
have about yourself. Therefore, all information defines and limits
your experience of yourself. As discussed in Chapter Ill, you are
beyond this constricted definition.



    Thisformat may be used by the rotating group facilitator.

    Let your eyes close and move into a quiet space. As any
    information about yourself comes into your awareness,
    contemplate the possibility that allinformation is with-
    out cause. Contemplateany information as beingwithout
    any cause. Whenever you're ready, bring your aware-
    ness back to the room, notice where you're sitting, and
    let your eyes open.