"Begin by sitting and watching your breathing. What-
                           Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 49
    ever experience or thought comes through your aware-
    ness, reduce that to an object so that you're witnessing
    that thought or experience that comes through your
    awareness. Very gently, view it as an object. Whatever
    thought or feelings or experiences that you are having,
    yiew them as an object to be witnessed."



   A workshop participant once said to me after this exercise, "I
was immediately drawn into a beingness or an energy and then that
energy expanded. I was able to disappear into that energy so that all
that was there was the energy. I was not there." It's really easy just
to witness. All you have to do is be, it really requires no effort.


          Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate what it would be like to be free of all thoughts.


   A student commented, "l saw the thoughts as hooks in my mind;
some seemed harder to release than others, and Irealized they were
more like fish hooks, like little barbs. It was pretty interesting."
Another student said,"l had a hard time when you said to be free of
all thoughtconstructs. It was as if as soon as I was given permission
to be free I went through all these tapes about why I couldn't be free.
I couldn't imagine being free." I told this student to notice beliefs
such as "I can't be free."
    I was sitting with a yoga teacher, Baba Prakashananda in
Bombay. He and I were the only ones in the room. All of a sudden,
he began sending me a lot of energy. He was looking at me, and my
body started to feel really hot. I felt incredible psychic agony, I felt
like I had to hold onto the rug. I had decided that he was doing
something; I didn't know what it was but I wanted to. The energy
9ot more and more intense, and I thought I was going to go crazy.
He was looking down at me, which of course made it even worse.
I waited for something to emerge from beneath my usual awareness.
What came by was, "I'm sorry that I am." I looked at it, observed
it, and watched it subside (disappear). I was in a completely
50 - Quantum Consciousness
different state. What was true was that I had walked around
unconsciously in my life saying, "I'm sony, I'm sorry that I am."
That had been my pattern, and I had walked around experiencing
that. There are two reasons I tell this story. First, I tell it to point out
the process of things emerging from underneath our usual aware-
ness—from that ninety percent of our minds that is "underwater"
like an iceberg, Meher Baba's analogy I cited earlier in this book.
"I'm sorry that I am" came up from under the water; I saw it as an
object and then could letgo of it. Basically, it seems that you cannot
let go of something untilyou know what it is. Second, when I started
working in groups, I noticed that the issues and patterns were
heightened more because the energy is a little bit stronger in groups
than when one is alone.
    The first step in actually experiencing the underlying unity of
the quantum universe is to get in touch with the changeless observer
that is always present. Indeed, one of the most important under-
standings in quantum physics is that space predominates throughout
the universe. The one thing we all share is this unified space. While
contacting something so vast seems like a tall order, it can be
achieved by taking the step of observing your thoughts, identifica-
tions, and emotions and experiencing the space between them, orby
becoming aware that you are the observer of your mind. As you do
this over time, you feel an increasing sense of equilibrium as you
allow yourself to perceive the space between each "thought-wave"
as it arises and subsides. Experiencing the space between our
thoughts eventually leads to aloosening of allthe boundaries we put
around things, ideas, people, and so on. And as the boundaries
loosen, our level of comfort increases.
    The second Level takes us further into the boundless region of
Quantum Consciousness as we begin to work with emotions as
energy.
Four

                   The Energy of
                                     Emotions
Few of us could deny the power of emotions. Just notice how this
energy takes over your body, your thoughts, your reactions, and
your decision-making process. Throughout history philosophers
have attempted to explain the inational nature of emotions. In the
l960's, the human potential movementbegan to suggest multitudes
of ways to handle these feelings and emotional states, which appear
to have a life of their own.
    In the last chapter we explored and, I hope, experienced
ourselves as the witness or observer of our thoughts and emotions.
This chapter brings us to another quantum jump beginning to
experience ouremotions, feelings and the rest of the world as made
of energy.
    Throughout our life certain sensations in our body are experi-
enced as good and desirable. We love happiness and joy. Other
emotions, however, are said to be bad, unpleasant and undesirable,
like anger, hurt, fear, or sadness. As we move closer to a Quantum


                                51
52 - Quantum Consciousness
understanding and begin to employ the use of our quantum lens
more, we can begin to appreciate that the world, as noted physicist
David Bohm suggests, is made of energy. How then can we apply
this principle in our daily lives to help us feel more connected to
everything else and less in pain, particularly pertaining to unwanted
emotional states like anger, sadness, and hate.


                             Level 2
                  The universe is made of energy.