Very gently, pull your awareness away from the film.
    See if you can find where in your body you are experi-
    encing the feelings called jealousy. Notice the size and
    shape of the emotion. Begin to witness the jealousy as
    energy in a different form, then a chair, or your arm. If
    any thoughts, or impressions come up—-see them as
    energy. See if there is a color or a temperature to the
    energy. View it as energy, listen to its sound, watch it.
    Continue to watch whatever feelings are going on inside
    you and try to view them as energy. Notice its dimen-
    sions and shape. Merge with and be the emotion as
    energy.
                                        The Energy of Emotions - 69
    I have found that it is surprisingly difficult sometimes to pull
your attention away from the story and onto the feelings, because
you feel so justified. Sometimes my students have felt they got
"stuck" at some point in the process. If this happens, I suggest that
you continue by focusing on the "stuckness" as made of energy.
    Workshop participants have often asked me about repressing
emotions as opposed to expressing them. There's repressing, which
means sitting on your jealousy or anger. There's expressing—two
opposite sides of the same thing. Then there's allowing the energy
to be. The quantum approach gives us the third option, the aware-
ness that what you are experiencing is energy.
     One workshop participant said,"When I'm really angry, Idon't
think. I know I'm angry, but the thought of doing something about
it rather than letting the motion picture go through my mind for
hours and hours doesn't dawn on me." I said "This is a practice."
Right now the film is going on and on and on and on. Our hope is
that two weeks from now it willonly go on and on. And then it will
go on. In other words, we want to recognize your pattern and catch
your pattern earlier and earlier.
     Say you always pick lousy relationships. Suddenly, ten years
later, you say, "Gee, I did it again." And you pick another relation-
ship and it's five years later. When you pick it up again it's two years
later, then it's one year later. We hope you work it out before you
die! The same goes for handling emotions; the more you practice
inner transmutation the easier it gets, and the earlier you will shift
your attention."
     A student brought his experience with the teachings of G. I.
Gurdjieff, a Sufi master, to try to be awake and to observe constantly
what one does. "When the feeling of anger or whatever came up,"
he said, "we'd give it a name like John. When it came up later, we
could say: 'Here comes John again."'
    I commented, "In psychosynthesis, that's called using sub-
personalities. Oh, there's John. John's running his number. There's
Fred." There is even a therapy called "name therapy", and one
called "voice dialogues'. You can give names to all the different
parts of your personality and then watch them do their numbers, or
you can even talk with each one. Using that technique helps to get
some distance on them. There is another level, however, because
you are beyond these sub-personalities. As will be demonstrated in
70 - Quantum Consciousness
the next chapter, you are also the creator of the sub-personalties.
    Using names is a psychosynthesis way of working on feelings.
You could draw pictures of them and put them on your wall to get
more in touch with them and know when they take over. Here in
quantum, we are working with the basic substance: energy, rather
than focusing on the part, sub-personality, I-dentity, or false self.
We are focusing on what the emotion is made of, energy, its
composition. This is where quantum psychology joins hands with
psychology, Eastern traditions and quantum physics. In this ap-
proach, we synthesize East, Middle East, and West in this journey
to uncover who we are.



               Quantum Exercise 13

    Working with sexuality.

    Step I:      Recall a story or fantasy that made you feel
                 sexual.

    Step II:     Allow the energy to manifest.

    Step Ill:    Notice where in your body the sexuality is
                 occurring.

    Step IV:     Notice the size and shape of the sexual
                 energy.

    Step V:      Take your attention away from the story as
                 to why you feel sexual.

    Step VI:     De-label the sexual energy—and see it as
                 energy. If any thoughts, impressions, asso-
                 ciations or fantasies come-up—see them as
                 energy.
                                         The Energy of Emotions - 71
     In this exercise we are looking at one of our favorite topics, sex.
In order to explore this, it is time for us to add yet another ingredient
to our quantum approach. In this step, we are going to begin to
recognize that not only is the E-motion and sensation made of
energy, so is the story or fantasy in our mind.

    "This is the first conscious shock and it is given the general
    description of remembering yourself. This state of con-
    sciousness leads to the transformation of impressions.
    Everyone is governed by his own set of reactons to impres-
    sions." (Nicoll,1984:52-54)
     What Gurdjieff and Ouspensky are saying is that we focus on
our impressions of life and never see life. We only see our impres-
sions. In this exercise we will see our story (impressions) as made
of energy, this will become the transformative agent.
     To go even deeper, however, we are going to explore our skin
boundaries as made of energy, as wellas the chair, and expand this
to include our entire universe.
    Before we jump into this issue which carries usthrough so many
feelings and memories, let us first look at it from different perspec-
tives.

              A Psychological Look
    Wilhelm Reich, M.D., the creator of Reichian therapy, consid-
ered by many the father of body work, proposed a theoq around
sexuality as early as the 1940s, which has stood the test of time.
Reich demonstrated that sex or the orgasm has a cycle, namely,
tension, charge, discharge, relaxation. This can best be seen below.


                          Illustration 3
72 - Quantum Consciousness
  This can also be parallel to an emotional cycle and thought cycle
presented in Chapter 3, where we feel anger or have a thought, we
build up charge, we yell, and then feel relaxed. Reich believed that
this was essential in maintaining the health of the individual and the
body. Reich, it should be noted, caused so much controversy, that
by the mid-to late 1950s,his books werebumed by the Federal Food
and Drug Administration in New York City. Reich was sent to
Leavenworth prison. Wilhelm Reich actually died in prison. This is
how controversial and highly charged the topic of sexuality is.


             An Eastern Perspective
     In India, and particularly in the last twenty-five years in the
West, tantric yoga has become a recognized term referring to work
with sexual energy. It should be noted,however, there are 112 yoga
tantras or techniques to bring the practitioner into a greater"expan-
sion of knowledge." I note this now because less than 1% of tantric
yoga deals with sex. Yet, the issue of sexuality is so highy charged,
that tantric yoga is sold in the West because of its association with
sex, even tbough sex is less than 1% of it's actual practice.
Furthermore, promotion of sex as tantra is a great marketing
approach used by Indian "Gurus."
    In working with sexual energy, however, and tantric yoga in its
purest form, sexual energy is not seen as different from any other
energy. In this way,"sexual energy" is not considered bad, unholy,
or something that should be repressed. On the other hand, "sexual
energy" is not seen as something that necessarily needs to be
expressed. Normally, as mentioned earlier, we only have a polarity
of choices: express (I will,I should) and repress (I shouldn't,l better
not). This polarity, as all of us know, causes a conflict that has
touched all of us at one time or another. In this approach however,
sexual energy is allowed, recognized and observed, as what it is,
energy in a different form than anger, or sadness or even physical
objects (more about this later).
    Tantric sex does not have a goal of orgasm. It is about what the
definition of tantra is " the expansion of knowledge."
    In Reich's orgasm cycle, the energy is discharged.
    In tantric sex, however, there is tension, charge; your attention
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 73
is turned around and the sensations are seen as energy. Notice what
happens. Visually it can be seen and illustrated as follows.


                         Illustration 4