If Bohm is correct and the universe is a gigantic multi-
dimensional hologram, such an underlying holographic
128 - Quantum Consciousness

    order would have profound implications for many of our
    other common sense notions about reality. For example, in
    a holographic universe, time and space would no longer be
    viewed as fundamentals. Because the universe would be
    seen as possessing a deeper level in which concepts such as
    location break down, time and three-dimensional space ...
    would have to be viewed as projections of this deeper order.
    In other words, in the super-hologram of the universe, past,
    present, and future are all enfolded and exist simulta-
    neously." (Talbot, 1987:46-47)
    What does all this mean in simple English? If in fact the
universe is a hologram, as Bohm suggests, and past, present, and
future are all existing simultaneously, taken to the next logical
extension, there is no time. Why is there no time? Because if
everything is occuning simultaneously then there would only be
NOW. Simply put, it would require an observer that would break-
down and decide there was a past, present, and future in order for
there to be time (or beginning, middle, and an end).
    Physicist David Bohm suggests,
    "One is led to a new notion of unbroken wholeness which
    denies the classical analyzability of the world into sepa-
    rately and independently existing pans. The inseparable
    quantum interconnectedness of the whole universe is a
    fundamental reality." (Herbert, 1985:18)

    This can best be understood by metaphor. Imagine that every-
thing in the universe—you, your perceptions, feelings, the car, the
moon, everything—is one large, solid, rubber ball. Billions of little
pockets arise and subside on the surface of the ball. As a pocket
arises it observes the world. Since the pockets observe the world,the
world appears to be out there. The pockets naturally imagine they
must be separate from the ball. Many times in each second these
pockets go in and out of this rubber ball so that it appears as though
there is just world out there, and little pockets (observers) overhere.
These little pockets (people) begin to explore this world, postulat-
ing how it got there, why it's there, and maybe their place in the
world. The pockets (people) can never notice when they become the
ball because there is no them to notice it or to be aware when it
                                           The Concept of Time - 129
occurs. This is the universe; it only exists subjectively speaking, as
long as you are there to be aware of it. This is the nature of time.
Since there has to be the illusion of a you separate from the world,
deciding that this unbroken wholeness is divided into a concept of
past, a concept of present, and a concept of future.
    Now, if there is no time, this has extraordinary implications.
The first implication is that if there is no time, then there cannot be
cause and effect, because cause and effect are linear and require a
past, present, and future as a time line, linear construct. If everything
is happening simultaneously, there could be no this in the past
causing this in the present or future. Why? Because they would all
just be occurring. (More about this in Chapter X).
     For now, from a holographic point of view, it is impossible to
say this or that in the past caused this or that effect in the present or
future. This is a linear way of thinking. If we allow ourselves to just
consider the possibility of no time and no cause and effect in the
present or future, what would that mean? If there is no time, there
is actually no order nor structured universe; there is just one
undifferentiated consciousness. Gestalt Psychology research dem-
onstrated that the brain organizes things in a linear way. This
organization of things in a linear way presents the appearance of
time as if there were a past, present, and a future. But if no time
exists, there is no cause and effect and no past, present, and future.

    "In terms of time, the universe as we perceive it, with its
    apparently separate succession of moments, would be the
    smear of ink once the turning handle has stretched itoutinto
    a long ribbon. We are not able to perceive that time, at the
    level of the super-hologram, possesses a coherent and
    unbroken structure, because that structure is enfolded or
    implicate in the level of the universe that we are privy to.
    Time and three-dimensional space are not the only pro-
    cesses Bohm feels are best explained as enfoldings and
    unfoldings in and out of the implicate order.

    Perhaps the most intriguing aspect of Bohm's theory is how
    it might apply to our understanding of the human mind. As
    he sees it, if every particle of matter interconnects with
    every other particle, the brain itself must be viewed as
130 - Quantum Consciousness
    infinitely interconnected with the rest of the universe."
    (Talbot, 1987:48-49).

      This has important implications in the field of psychology,
since psychology has taken a reductionist position in regard to
problems. Most of us, who have been through some form of therapy
have looked at life through this reductionist position. By reduction-
ist I mean that the therapist, presupposes that back then, in our past,
lies the problem, which is occurring right now (in the present). This
reduces cause and effect down to a simple Newtonian unit of past,
present, and future. Most forms of therapy think, since thought
occurs and can only be linear, that an event has a beginning, middle
and an end. Let's ask ourselves, "What if things aren't linear, cause
and effect and time bound? In Quantum Reality, by Nick Herbert,
we find:
    "Quantum Reality #5: Quantum logic (the world obeys a
    non-human kind of reasoning.)" (Herbert, 1985:20).

   In the exercises that follow in this section and the rest of the
book, we are asked to consider the Whai lf and develop an
understanding beyond the mind.
    "Einstein threw out the classical concept of time. Bohr
    throws out the classical concept of truth. Our classical ideas
    of logic are simply wrong in a basic practical way. The next
    step is to learn to think in the right way, to learn to think
    quantum-logically." (Herbert, 1985:21).
    Noted scientist Pribram demonstrates that not only is every-
thing connected to everything else,it is indicated that each"imagined"
individual brain has its own tuning systems through which it
translates light into a holographic image. This would mean thate ach
imagined self perceives its own individuality and experience through
the whole.
    "Pribram goes on to postulate that perhaps even at a level
    available to our perceptions, objective reality is holo-
    graphic and might be thought of as little more than a
    'frequency domain.' That is, even the world we know may
    not be composed of objects. We may only be sensing
                                          The Concept of Time - 131

    mechanisms moving through a vibrating dance of frequen-
    cies. Pribram suggests that the reason we translate this
    vibrating dance of frequencies into the solidity and objec-
    tivity of the universe as we know it is that our brains operate
    on the same holograhics-like principles as the dance of
    frequencies and is able to convert them into a picture much
    the same as a television converts the frequencies it receives
    into a more coherent image. As he puts it, 'I think the brain
    generates its own constructions and images of physical
    reality. But at the same time it generates them in such a way
    that they resonate with what really is there."' (Osistynski,
    70-73).

    As an example, if we could imagine a super, three-dimensional
movie of which we are all a part; the common factor is the light
which passes through the projector and which is the implicate or
underlying order. Each individual image on the screen translates
that light within the light of the whole-(logram) into different
frequencies, thus yielding different experiential realities. The brain
of each individual sees only through the individual frequency, thus
the explicate order. They do not see nor experience the implicate
order(the light). The fascinating and wonderfulfactis that the light,
being the common factor, not only makes us all the same, but that
in each "individual" brain, since it is a hologram, lies the entire
universe or implicate order; in metaphysical terms, the macrocosm
is in the microcosm and the microcosm is in the macrocosm. In
Quantum Psychology terminology, the microcosm is the macro-
cosm, the macrocosm is the microcosm.
      As Bohm sees it, this lack of distinct boundaries between what
is alive and what is not once again underscores the inadequacy of a
strictly mechanistic approach to the universe. Instead of trying to
divide the universe into parts that are alive and parts that are not, a
better approach might be to view the universe as an unbroken whole,
a totality into which both living and nonliving things are constantly
enfolding and unfolding.
    What does all of this make of the mind-body problem? As
Bohm sees it,
    "If the universe is non-local at a sub-quantum level, that
    means that reality is ultimately a seamless web, and it is
132 - Quantum Consciousness