Step VI:     De-label the anger, see it as energy and
                 merge with it.
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 65
      Before we go into the experience of working with anger,Ithink
it is important for me to recount a story of what happened to me
while in India, and why I have added another step to the process.
      In 1979, while living in the monastery in India,the environment
was set up to "increase the energy" by avoiding talking and sex, and
little food was available, etc. There was a lot of emotional pain since
nobody there had a way to escape. I'm sure we can all relate to
feeling anger and running to get chocolate, or to a movie, or having
sex to handle the emotional state. With no escape, one day [ felt so
much anger that my body felt like it was in flames and Iwas on fire.
My friend Mark Mordin, who had lived in India for twelve years,
said, "Be the fire, rather than the fuel." What I did was merge with
the fire rather than being the one that was being burned. Quite
instantly, I felt calm, relaxed and more centered. Since then, while
working with clients or in workshops, I suggest to people who are
feeling overwhelmed by anger to notice where in their body they are
experiencing this emotion, and to notice its size and shape since
emotions are made of energy in different shapes and forms. For
example anger is a different form of energy than love. This means
that although the anger is made of the same energy as the love, it's
shape or the form it takes is different because of the label. Finally,
I ask people to be the emotion completely. Merge with the emotion
as energy.
    The results have been amazingly powerful. One client recently
was experiencing anxiety attacks. Iasked her, "Where in your body
do you experience the anxiety?" She replied, "My chest." I said,
"Notice the size and dimensions of the anxiety." She said, "It has a
funny not quite oval shape." I said, "Be the anxiety completely.
Rather than being the one feeling anxious,be the anxiety as energy."
She replied, "wow, I feel more centered, more relaxed, more
myself."
    This exercise focuses on anger, butif another emotion comes in,
you can also use that one. Here is a format for the rotating group
facilitator to consider.
66 - Quantum Consciousness



    Practice

    Formatfor rotating group leader:

    Remember a scene. It could have been last year, it could
    have been five years ago, it could have been ten years
    ago. Let the E-motion called anger to come into your
    awareness. As you watch this scene and yourself in it,
    look around and notice other people and sounds. Notice
    what the feeling is or what the sensations in your body
    are. Your awareness might be pulled out a little by the
    sounds around you, but again, focus on the movie, the
    story. Allow the emotion or sensations of anger to begin
    to emerge and come to the surface as you watch the
    remembered experience. Notice where in your body it
    is: in your chest, or wherever it might be. Notice its
    shape or its size. Now, take your attention away from
    the story and focus on the anger itself as made of energy.

     Begin to focus your awareness on this anger rather than
     on the story and reasons why you're angry. Focus on the
     anger itsejf. As you watch the anger, you'll notice that
     you'll begin to see it as energy in a compacted form.
     Notice its size or how it might move or not move. At first
     it might get more intense, but as you continue to watch
     it as energy in compact form, notice what happens. If
     thoughts or the story comes up—see it as energy. Now
     merge with and be the anger as energy, rather than the
     one who is angry. Focus on that energy as you.

     When you are ready, very gently allow yourself to come
     back to the room.



     A student once reported: "My anger was rectangular, and there
were two holes on either side." I replied, "If your anger has a
particular shape or color, focus on that, and be the anger as energy;
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 67
notice what happens." Carl Jung, M.D. utilized emotional states as
pathways,

    "The whole procedure is a kind of enrichment and clarifi-
    cation of the affect whereby the affect and the content are
    brought nearer to consciousnes. ..The emotional distur-
    bance can also be dealt with in another way notby clarifying
    it intellectually, but by giving it a visible shape." (ROSSi,
    1986:85-96)




               Quantum Exercise 12

    Working on jealousy.

    Step I:      Recall a story or memory when you felt
                 jealous.

    Step II:     Allow the energy to manifest.

    Step Ill:    Notice where in your body the jealousy is
                 occurring.

    Step IV:     Notice the size and shape of the jealousy.

    Step V:      Take your attention away from the story as
                 to why you are jealous.

    Step VI:     De-label the jealousy and see it as energy.If
                 any thoughts, impressions, associations or
                 the story comes up—see it as energy.



    Here the work remains the same. Continue to focus your
attention on the E-motion as energy rather than on the story of why
the E-motion is present. We are again assuming that all thoughts and
E-motions are energy in a different form. First, we'll bring up a story
68 - Quantum Consciousness
of jealousy. Then we'll move away from the film and move our
attention to the feeling of jealousy. If you don't have any conscious
feeling of jealousy, use another E-motion.
     We are planting seeds, so that when you arejealous a week from
now or two years from now, you'll switch your attention to
experiencing the emotion itself. Once it happens for you, it will start
a whole chain of events.
    I was really upset with some people about a month and a half
ago. A friend said to me, "Why focus on the people? Why not focus
on the feelings?"l did and walked through the steps; once again the
energy transformed (shifted) itself.



    Practice

    Format for rotating group facilitator to consider.'

    Remember a scene in which you felt you had every right
    to be jealous. Notice who is involved in the scene that
    you're watching. Notice the temperature in the scene in
    your memory, or if you can experience any voices or
    sounds. Let the film roll. Notice the feelings that arise as
    you watch the film. Watch the film and the story called
    jealousy. Notice any sensations.