Observation leads to an experience of the self as being more
than the thoughts, feelings, emotions, and sensations that fre-
quently buffet it. If we remain tightly identified with the comings
and going of the mind, there is no room for experiencing things in
any other way. We are, in essence, captives of a very narrow,
entrenched set of beliefs and viewpoints. Learning to observe opens
our psychological windows, letting in the light and air of expanded
perspectives.
    The experience of Level 1 is the experience of being more than
what troubles you. If a part of you can witness or observe your
feeling of sadness over the breakup of a relationship, then that
means that you are not just your sadness—just as you are not the
picture you draw to image your sadness. There is the feeling of
sadness—perhaps there is the picture of sadness—-and behind or
beyond both is the you that observes these different facets of
experience we call sadness.
    Consider the same event from two different modes of experi-
encing it. The scenario is: I have turned in a monthly report to my
boss, which he usually approves and compliments. This time I am
called into his office, the door is shut, and he impatiently tells me
there is a major oversight in my report, which will have to be
completely redone. I flush in surprise and embarrassment, my
palms sprout beads of perspiration, and my stomach feels like it was
hit with a two-by-four. I mutter my apologies and return to my
embarrassment breaking over me. My breathing is shallow, my
heart is beating rapidly, and all I want to do is run out of the building.
I feel stupid, I feel grossly inadequate, and I also feel enraged.
    If I choose to practice the quantum principle of Level 1, I will
have a very different experience of the same event. Anything I can
witness, Ican go beyond. Philosopher Alfred Korsybski stated it as
"anything you know aboutcannot be you."If I can begin to observe
and witness my reactions, than I will feel freer and more at peace.
                          Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 29
It is only by the identification and fusion with a thought or feeling
that I limit myself from being the observer to becoming the
experience itself. In my previous book, Trances People Live
healing Approaches in Quantum Psychology, I describe this as the
process of going into trance,"the fusion and merging with thoughts,
feelings, emotions, and past associations."
    In the above experience, if Itotally identify with the feelings of
humiliation and embarrassment, and if I couple this psycho-emo-
tional process with the decision that"this is me,"then lam confined
to the parameters and boundaries of the experience labeled "humili-
ation and embarrassment." However, if I shift part of my attention
to the level of observation, then other options become available. If
I can observe my reactions, then I can go beyond them. I can step
out of "my" reactions and begin to notice them. Then Ican begin to
choose, observe, notice the pattern, and so on. As I comprehend,
even for a moment, that I exist outside of my thoughts and emotions,
they have less effect on me.
    This truth became profoundly real for me in June of 1980 in
India. At about 6 o'clock in the morning as I was walking to a bus
station, my mind was holding its usual banter of conversation.
Suddenly I experienced myself outside of, or larger than, or beyond
what I was thinking or feeling.
   What was more astounding was that an observing "I," which
was me was always there. The smaller I's of "i feel good" or "i feel
bad," or "i love myself" or "i hate my self," were transient. The
observing "I" was always present. I realized at that time, that no
wonder "I" felt so insecure. I was identifying with an "i" that came
and went, rather than the observing I, or witnessing presence. I
asked myself, who has witnessed all my thoughts, feelings, and
happenings of "my" life? I laughed as I realized "I" was the witness.
I asked myself who came first, me the observing "I," or the
emotional upset that had been bothering me. Again, obviously, the
same observing "I" was there before, during, and after the upset.
My experience of myself was permanently transformed as Ilaughed
at myself for missing what was so obvious—me—the observing "I"
that was always there watching all the transient i's.
    The realness of that new consciousness never left me and
continued to solidify and deepen for me on an experiential level
the first level of Quantum Psychology.
30 - Quantum Consciousness