Upon my return from India in 1982,l began to teach workshops
in my living room. These small groups ranging in size from eight to
sixteen participants were the first step in the development of
Quantum Psychology". Much of this text also appeared in my
doctoral thesis. As time went on, the workshops expanded and
synthesized other schools and as well as psychological and spiritual
disciplines to make the Quantum context experiential. I felt then,
and still do now, that the ideal would be to teach approaches to
working with oneself and others, so that people could organize their
own informal groups. Ultimately in this way people could become
their own teachers.
    This book is limited in scope, since Quantum Psychology"
contains an elaborate system of exploration that takes fifteen days
of training to complete. The text was designed, however, to present
over 80 exercises and contemplations to stimulate and explore
oneself, in whatever setting you decide on. Some people are doing
the work on their own, while others have found it more valuable to
create their own leaderless study group that meets in someone's
home every week or every other week. This way of rotating the
facilitators' role, and having each person take a turn guiding the
group through Quantum exercises, processes, and sharing seems to
be most effective, and probably the one I would recommend.
     Many workshop participants have said to me that the Quantum
style of work opens up so many different windows of understanding
that, often, they lack a context or group to talk it over with, which

                                  l
2 - Quantum Consciousness
they felt was needed. Certainly it can help to provide support while
making certain internal changes.
    Quantum Psychology" really asks the reader to practice and do
the exercises and contemplations, rather than just read them. Quan-
tum Psychology" is not a spectator sport. I have tried to include
exercises and contemplations that were explainable and do-able in
the context of the book. If one exercise doesn't fit or work move on
to another one—it doesn't mean you are less evolved, or not ready,
it means it doesn't fit for you so move on to the next one. The parts
of the system presented here are meant to embrace and be added to
whatever "work" you are already doing with yourself, and is surely
not meant as the only way or the "cure all." The exercises work best
when done with an open mind, putting your definitions of the world,
both inner and outer, aside, using a"What if this is true,""Suppose,"
or "Let's look at this as a possibility" attitude. After each exercise
is completed, if done in a group context, numerous meanings will
be generated from the group. Actually, there truly is no one meaning
to the exercises—just doing them and exploring is enough.
     I hope you enjoy the process as much as I did, or shalll say, "I
hope it is as good for you, as it was for me."

                                                         With Love,
                                                       Your brother,
                                                            Stephen
One

                                          rousing
                                     theGiant
For as long as I can remember, my greatest wish was to be able to
answer the question "Who am I?" I pursued this goal for over two
decades, trampling through every major and minor discipline of
Western psychology, Eastern meditation, and even Quantum Phys-
ics, as well as side trips into the drugs and "free" sexuality of the
 1960's.
     By 1976 I had had my chakras balanced, restored my body to
its orgasmic best through Reichian therapy, sat in the Gestalt "hot
seat," reenacted traumas of my childhood in psychodrama, ex-
plored the sub-personalities and ego states of Psychosynthesis and
Transactional Analysis, learned over a hundred meditation tech-
niques, been rebirthed, and chanted the name of God in several
different languages.
     Still I felt incomplete. I had no calming sense of knowing who
I was, I had not found an experience of myself that was permanent,
I could not point to a changeless Self. I kept being different selves