Step V:      Condense some emptiness down and create
                an enlightenment system, (like Yoga, Medi-
                tation, Buddhism,Sufism, Zen, Christianity,
                Judaism, Shamanism, Course in Miracles,
                Metaphysics, The Occult, etc.)
178 - Quantum Consciousness
    Step VI:     Condense down some more emptiness and
                 make it into another system.

    Step VII: Now, step back and notice how each system
                appears like a bubble floating in emptiness.



    This is Quantum Psychology's answer to parallel universe
theory, namely that each universe actually exists side by side. Of
course, one could argue that what about a system that isn't men-
tioned. The answer is clear, however, since the space that surrounds
the bubbles, and the bubbles, are made of the same material, so all
universes exist and are made of the same emptiness.
    Since, as Einstein pointed out, "Everything is made of empti-
ness and form is condensed emptiness," then every universe exists
because all are made of the same material.
    This brings us back to the old idea in Buddhism of a middle path.
Many teachers have suggested that the middle path means moderate
eating, moderate sleeping, etc. In the purist form of Buddhism, the
middle path means nothing is true, nothing is false. How does this
apply? Look again at all the universes (Gestalt, Jung, Yoga, etc.)
you created out of the emptiness that you saw with your eyes closed.
Notice that the bubble is made of the same substance as the
emptiness surrounding it. Notice the bubble de-constructs when the
emptiness and the bubble are seen as the same substance.

Principle: The nothing (emptiness) contracts and becomes what
would be called truth, and the nothing (emptiness) contracts and
becomes what is called false. In short, the nothing (emptiness)
becomes truth, the nothing (emptiness) becomes false.

    Presently, there is a New Age comedian who calls himself
Swami Beyondananda. He has said, "People that have been work-
ing on themselves, doing spiritual disciplines and psychological
studies, deserve NOTHING. If you've tried so many paths, Ican say
with confidence NOTHING WORKS." Here Einstein, Buddha and
Beyondananda concur; form is contracted emptiness, emptiness is
form. Therefore, seekers deserve NOTHING.
                                          Tiie Living Void - 179
    How the parallel universe theory applies to Quantum Psychol-
ogy and to our lives becomes clearer as we continue on our
experiential journey.


               Quantum Exercise 53
    Step I:     Let your eyes close and notice the emptiness
                in front of you.

    Step II:    Take some emptiness and condense it down
                and create a psychological system, like Ge-
                stalt or Jungian or Ericksonian or
                Transactional Analysis or Psychosynthesis
                or Freudian Analysis, etc.

    Step Ill:   Take some more emptiness and condense it
                down and create another psychological sys-
                tem.

    Step IV:    Condense down some more emptiness and
                create another psychological system.

    Step V:     Condense some emptiness down and create
                an enlightenment system, like Yoga, Medi-
                tation, Shamanism, Course in Miracles,
                Buddhism, Sufism, Zen, Christianity, Ju-
                daism.

    Step VI:    Condense down some more emptiness and
                make it into another system.

    Step VII: Now, step back and notice how each system
                appears like a bubble floating in space.
180 - Quantum Consciousness

    Step VIII: Now, merge with each belief system one by
                one, and notice how when you are in one
                belief system (bubble), you experience that
                system to the exclusion of the others. Move
                from one to the next experiencing each
                bubble, than "pop-out" and witness each
                one.

    Step IX:      Notice who did all of that (made emptiness
                  into form) (or thinned out form to make it
                  into emptiness).



    Finally, how does this apply to our own lives? Any conflict,
either within myself or that which appears outside of myself,
requires that I merge with a part-(icle) (bubble) and imagine it is
separate from another part-icle (bubble).
    When something is in your consciousness, like anger, for
example, the anger, when seen as a part-(icle) or as a wave (see
Chapter Ill), and, also, when the space surrounding this part-(icle)
of angeris seen as the same substance, the anger loses its contrastness,
and cannot be held in consciousness so easily.
    Let us see now how this can be applied to relationships.


           The Relationship Process
     The purpose of the relationship process is to see conflicts in a
relationship as part-(icles), or bubbles in opposition that are floating
in emptiness. As mentioned earlier, nothing can be experienced
unless there is a contrast, or we could say nothing can be experi-
enced if there is no contrast. Form and emptiness, day and night,
black and white, love and hate, feeling and no feeling, cold and
hot—everything has its opposite. Without a contrast, there could be
no experiences. In a relationship, the only way there can be an
argument or a fight, is if there are two opposing part-(icles) or
bubbles.
    In order for you to have a fight, argument, or a disagreement
with your relationship, whether it be your partner, wife, mother,
                                                The Living Void - 181
husband, daughter, whoever, you have to identify yourself as a
particular position or part-(icle) in emptiness. Whoever that person
is that you are arguing with, also has to be identified with a particular
opposing bubble or part-(icle), held in emptiness.


               Quantum Exercise 54
    Step I:       Notice when you are in a conflict with any-
                  one.

    Step II:      Step outside of, and witness or observe the
                  belief system bubble that you are identify
                  ingwith. For example,if you want something
                  and your partner does not, experience the
                  wanting, notice its size and shape, see it as
                  energy.

    Step Ill:     Notice the difference between you and this
                  part-(icle).

    Step IV:      Noticethe space surrounding the part-(icle).

    Step V:      Notice the opposite part-(icle) called "hus-
                 band" or "wife" and its size and shape. Do
                 this until you can see both part-(icles) as
                 energy floating in emptiness.

    Step VI:     Be part-(icle),bubble or position A and look
                 at position B.

    Step VII: Be part-(icle), bubble or position B and look
               at position A.

    Step VIII: Be the emptiness and look at both part-
               (icle) bubble A and part-(icle) bubble B.
182 - Quantum Consciousness
   Step IX:     See the two part-(icles) that are positions as
                made of the same substance as the empti-
                ness surrounding them.


   Step X:       Allow them to deconstruct since there is no
                 contrast.

    Step XI:     Practice condensing and thinning-out emp-
                 tiness into part-(icles) and part-(icles) into
                 emptiness.

    Step XII: Turn your attention around. Notice who
               did all of that.


   So, the first thing you have to do, is to not be identified with your
position or be identified with the oppositional position, called
"husband". Let's say, for example, you want to go out and your
husband wants to stay in. You get into a huge fight and you're
saying, "I want to go, we never go out," and so on. He says, "I want
to stay in." Obviously you both are identified with two particular
part-(icles) or bubbles.
    As soon as the part-(icles) and the space are seen as the same,
de-construction occurs and they disappear. No contrasts.
   This process has brought several mixed reactions from work-
shop participants. One woman said, "It was not difficult being my
husband's bubble,but when I took on and experienced my daughter's
part-(icle), it was overwhelmingly painful."
    I replied, "Until you can be free to experience, and free not to
experience, your daughter's position, you can not pop-out of the
part-(icle) and observe it so that it de-constructs."
    Another man said,"l felt freer and it helped me to appreciate my
wife's position.""Generally," I replied, "You have to keep playing
with taking on and taking off the positions—like putting on and
taking off a shirt—until, the opposing position charge is diminished
enough so that you can just observe the part-(icle) bubble in
emptiness with no judgment, evaluation, or significance attached to
the opposing position."
                                               The Living Void - 183