A symbol can be defined as,
    "Something used or regarded as standing for or represent-
    ing something else." (American College Dictionary)·
   Symbols carry condensed feelings of compacted conscious-
ness. Often, a symbol can be powerful, because of meanings that
have been placed upon it, while the emptiness it emerged from, as
well as what it is made of, goes unnoticed.


             Quantum Exercise 83

    Find the empty space before the emergence
    of any religious symbols.

    The purpose of this exercise is to notice the empty space
    prior to a religious or spiritual symbol, such as a cross,
    Jewish star, mandala, statue, crystal, etc. l am going to
    ask you to notice a symbol. It doesn't matter what it is.
    You'll be surprised how many good or bad feelings
    (energy) you have attached to it. I want you then to go
    back into the empty space from which the symbol arose,
    to the empty space prior to the symbol.

    Practice

    Formatfor use by the rotating groupfacilitator:

    With eyes closed take a deep breath. I'd like you to
    develop an image, or let an image come to you, of a
    spiritual, religious, or political symbol. Notice what
    positive or negative feelings you have about the symbol.
    Then expand your awareness and find the emptiness
    prior to the emergence of that symbol. Let another
    symbol come up into your awareness. Notice the image,
    good or bad, and find the empty space that symbolcame
    from. Now let another symbol come up to your aware-
    ness. Notice the energy, and find the empty space that
244 - Quantum Consciousness
    symbol came from. Allow another symbol to come into
    your awareness, and again, locate the empty space that
    symbol came from. And finally, one more symbol.
    Notice the energy attached to it, and find the empty
    space. Notice that the symbol is made of condensed
    emptiness, and that all symbols are made of the same
    substance. This time stay in the empty space. Go deeply
    into the void prior to the emergence of any or all
    symbols. Stay there. Whenever you're ready to begin
    coming back, bring your awareness back here to the
    room, and allow your eyes to open.



     A student commented, "That was really refreshing. It was kind
of like going into outer space. I saw all of these symbols spilling
around, and Iwould create a feeling about one and throw itback,and
there was always that space."


                Qlantum Exercise 84
    (eyes closed)

    Step I:      Notice the emptiness in front of you.

    Step II:     Allow the emptiness in front of you to or-
                 ganize itself into consciousness of a symbol
                 (a flag, a religious symbol, etc.)

    Step Ill:    Merge with and experience the conscious-
                 ness of the symbol.

    Step IV:     Step back and notice the empty space that
                 surrounds the consciousness of the symbol.

    Step V:      See the consciousness of the symbol as con-
                 densed emptiness.
                                               Consciousness - 245
    Step VI:     See the consciousness you call "you" as the
                 same condensed emptiness as the conscious-
                 ness of the symbol.



    With this understanding, where is there to go? Here, once again,
we are asked to acknowledge the unity of everything, a major leap,
yet one that, from the point of view of consciousness (distinctions),
seems important.


              Is Emptiness Something
                  to be Afraid of?
        Often in workshops, people will say, "Wellthis leaves me
with nothing." On the contrary, itleaves you with everything. Noted
physicist J. A. Wheeler says, "Nothingness is the building block of
the universe." The nothing is alive! Nothing is in charge.


                Quantum Exercise 85
    (eyes closed)

    Step I:      See the emptiness in front of you.

    Step II:     Notice how the emptiness becomes some-
                 thing (thought, feeling, image, etc.)

    Step Ill:    Notice that you are made of the same emp-
                 tiness that has organized itself into a you, or
                 a separate self.
246 - Quantum Consciousness


          Quantum Contemplations
    Contemplate the nothing becomes thoughts, feelings, im-
    ages, chairs, etc.

    Contemplate the nothing becomes this "you," and the
    nothing becomes this "not you."

    Contemplate everything (experiences, actions, the move-
    ment of the eyes, smells, understanding) is made of that
    emptiness and occurs or doesn't occur through or by
    emptiness.



          Where Does this Leave us?
    Developing a quantum context does not exclude anything;
rather, it includes modem psychology, Eastern or Middle Eastern
philosophy and practices. What Quantum Psychology is pointing to
is a direction, or a way of viewing the problem of human suffering.
     This book is not an end but rathera beginning, a place where we
can alljoin hands and develop our own approaches to re-membering
and re-connecting to that underlying quantum unity. The quantum
approach does not exclude anything. It includes everything and
everyone. This book is a call to ourselves as brothers and sisters, to
connect at this invisible quantum level.
    A very famous Hindu Teacher, Ramana Maharishi was on his
deathbed, when one of his disciples said, "Please don't go." He
replied, "Where can I go?" He was saying, it's all the same quantum
stuff. Where is there that is different from here?
     Ultimately, however, quantum consciousness does not exist.
Why? Because there would have to be something separate from it
to say it did. So, quantum consciousness leaves us here, and so do
].
                                Epilogue
What would a Quantum World be like.

Imagine:
                                      John Lennon


Imagine there's no Heaven
It's easy if you try
No Hell below us
Above us only sky
Imagine all the people
Living for Today

Imagine there's no countries
It isn't hard to do
Nothing to kill or die for
And no religion too.
Imagine all the people
Living life in peace.

You may say I'm a dreamer
But I'm not the only one
I hope someday you'll join us
And the world will be as one.




                                247
248 0 Quantum Consciousness
   Imagine no possessions,
   I wonder if you can
   No need for greed or hunger
   A brotherhood/sisterhood of man
   Imagine all the people
   Sharing all the world

   You may say I'm a dreamer
   But I'm not the only one
   I hope one day you'll join us,
   And the world will be as ONE.
                                Bibliography
Almaas, A.H. The Void. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1986.

American College Dictionary. New York: Random House, 1963.

Bahirgit, B. P. The Amritanubhava of Jnanadeva. Bombay: Sirur Press, 1963.

Bentov, Itzhak. Stalking the Wild Pendulum.' On the Mechanics QfConsciousness.
       Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 1977.

Berrie, Eric. Games People Play. New York: Grove Press, 1964.

Besant, Ann and Leadbeater, C.W. Thought Forms. Wheaton IL: The Theosophi-
       cal Publishing House, 1969.

Blank, Gertrude R. and Rubin. Ego Psychology ll. New York: Columbia Univer-
       sity Press, 1974

Bohm. David. The Enfolding-Unfo/ding Universe: a Conversation with David
       Bohm.

       Quantum Theory. London: Constable, 195 l.

       Wholeness and the Implicate Order. London: Ark Paperbacks, 1980.


      and Peat, David F. Science, Order and Creativity. New York: Bantam
      Books, 1987.

      Unfolding Meaning. London: Ark Paperbacks, 1985.

Boslough, John. Stephen Hawking's Universe. New York: Avon Books. 1985.
250 - Quantum Consciousness
Briggs, John and Peat, David F. Looking Glass Universe: The Emerging Science
       of Wholeness. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1984.

Capek, M. The Philisophical Inpact of Contemporary Pysics. Princton, Nj: D.
       Van Nostrand, 1961.

Capra, Fritjof. The Tao of Physics. New York: Bantam Books, 1976.

Cayce, Edgar. Edgar Cayce on ESP. New York: Paperback Library, 1967.

Dass, Ram. The Only Dance There Is. New York: Bantam, 1972

Davies, Paul and Gribbin, John. The Myth of Matter: Dramatic Discoveries That
       Challenge Our Understanding ofPhysicalRealiiy. New York: Touchstone
       Books, Simon and Schuster, 1992.

Davis, Martha, Fannie, Patrick and McKay, Mathew. Thoughts and Feelings: The
       Art of Cognitive Stress Intervention. Richmond, CA: New Harbinger
       Publications, 198 1.

DeWitt, C. and Wheeler, J.A. Battelle Renconties, "Superspace and the Nature of
       Quantum Geometrodynamics: 1967 Lectures in Mathematics and Phys-
       ics". New York: W.A. Benjamin, 1968.

Erickson, M. H. and Rossi, E.L. Hypnotherapy: An Exploratory Casebook. New
       York: Irvington, 1979.

       and Rossi, E.L. The February Man: Facilitating New ldentiiy in
       Hypnotherapy.

Fung, Yu-lan. A Short History of Chinese Philosophy. New York: Macmillan,
       1958.

Godman, David. Be As You Are: The Teachings of Ramana Maharshi. Arkana,
       London, 1985.

Goldstein, Joseph. The Experience of Insight. Boston/London: Shambhala,l987.

       and Komfield, Jack. Seeking the Heart of Wisdbm.' The Path of Insight
       Meditation. Boston/London: Shambhala, 1987.

Govinda, L. A., Foundations of Tibetan Mysticism, New York: Samuel Weiser,
       1974.

Haley, J. Advanced Techniques of Hypnosis and Therapy: Selected Papers of
       Milton H. Erickson, MD. New York: Grune & Stratton, 1967.
                                                       Bibliography - 251

Harding, D. E. On Having No Head: Zen and the Rediscoven' of the Obvious.
      London: Arkana (Routledge & Kegan Paul), 1986.

       The Little Book of Life and Death. London: Arkana, 1988.

Hawking, Stephen. A BriefHistoy of Time. New York: Bantam Publishing Co.,
       1988,


Herbert, Nick. Quantum Reality: Beyond the New Physics. New York: Anchor
       Press, 1985.


Hoffer, Eric. The True Believer. New York: Harper and Row, 195 1.

Hoffman, Yoel. The Sound of the One Hand. New York: Basic Books, 1975.

Hua, Master Tripitaka. Shurangama Sutra. San Francisco, CA: Buddhist Text
      Translation Society, 1977.

       The Heart Sutra and Commentary. San Francisco, CA: Buddhist Text
       Translation Society, 1980.

Isherwood, Christopher and Prabhavanda, Swami. How to Know God.' the Yoga
       Aphorisms of Patanjali. California: New American Library, 1953.