In psychological terms, "quantum jump" points to a change that has
taken place that cannot be tracked. For example, a person can do
different types of therapy for 20 years, looking for the one idea,
method, or activity that will free him from a particular emotional
block. At some point in time it happens, and there is no way to
identify which of the hundred therapeutic variables have "caused"
the change. But something happens that we can't identify and the
16 - Quantum Consciousness
person has moved from one state (emotional block) to another, less
limited state (no emotional block).
     So it is with each level of understanding that successively
"removes" a level of limitation. At some point, perhaps after
practicing the exercises that accompany each step or "quantum
jump," a change occurs and you find yourself at a new level of
consciousness. With each step,the radius of your perception widens
to encompass an ever-expanding horizon.



                           Level 1
    As the observer of the contents of my mind (thoughts,
    feeling, emotions, sensations, associations), I am more
     than the contents of my mind.

     Anyone who has studied Eastern traditions will recognize the
obvious origins of this first level. The cornerstone of most medita-
tion disciplines is the practice of observing, "witnessing," or being
mindful of the contents of one's mind or state-of-being. Thus one
observes specific thoughts, images, sensations, feelings, and emo-
tions as they occur and, in the process, gains a sense of being
separate from or more than the flow of these contents.
    Once an observer begins to appreciate that he is not his
thoughts, feelings, and emotions, but rather an observing presence,
a process of disidentification is inaugurated that gradually
constellates as the first bridge to Quantum Consciousness.



                           Level 2
    Everything (thoughts, feelings, emotions, sensations, asso-
    ciations,) is made of energy.

    Here we approach the first aspect of the work of noted physicist
Dr. David Bohm. Bohm says that the world is made of energy,
space, mass, and time. At Level 2 we look at our relationship with
energy.
               Tiie Stepping Stones of Quantum Consciousness - 17
      Once you have experienced yourself as the observer, then you
can begin to experience how all the things you observe going on in
"your mind" are made of the same underlying energy. Anger is
made of the same energy that joy is. Level 2 allows you to remove
the labels or content that typically categorize various facets of
experience as being different, thus automatically diffusing or neu-
tralizing the charge of whatever experience you are observing.



                            Level 3
    I am the creator of what I observe.

   This section looks at the work of physicist Dr. WemerHeisenberg
and his Uncertainty Principle. Heisenberg demonstrated that the
observer creates that which he/she observes. In Quantum Psychol-
ogy terminology: we create our subjective experience. Although
this will be elaborated on in great detail in Chapter 5, to summarize
it here, this level also takes us through David Bohm's "mass" aspect
as an ingredient of the universe along with, its part-(icle) nature.
          In the Eastern tradition emphasis is placed solely on the
person doing the witnessing. There is no mention of any causal
relationship between the thoughts that are observed and the person
doing the observing. The implication is that the two phenomena-
thought and observer-of thought—are quite separate in essence.
     Quantum physics introduced me to my next bridging concept
via the principle of "observer-created reality," which states: (1)
There is no reality in the absence of observation and, (2) observation
creates reality (Herbert, 1985). Put simply, you as the observer
create the subjective reality you are observing.
     The importance of Level 3 in pragmatic terms is that it empow-
ers you beyond the passive position of witness to the active position
of creator. Once you understand, for example, that you create your
own sadness, or depression, or anxiety, you can stop creating it. This
bridge leads us further out of the dense forest of Newtonian thought
toward the ranging freedom of Quantum Consciousness.
18 - Quantum Consciousness

                Level 4 and Level 5
    The physical universe is made of Energy, Space, Mass and
    Time

    At Level 2 we experienced that whatever we observe in our-
selves—thoughts, emotions, sensations, etc.—is all made of energy.
At Level 3 we recognized that we are the creators of what we
experience, and the mass aspect of the physical universe. Now at
Level 4 we learn more about the time aspect of our universe and how
time is a concept created by us. At Level 5, we move through the
most unnoticed aspect of our world: the space that is ever present.
Atthis level we come in contact with the changeless nature of space,
and explore how by touching it our experience is transformed.
    As was mentioned previously, David Bohm discovered that the
physical universe is an "unfolding" and "enfolding" of four main
elements: energy, space, mass, and time (duration). Everything that
exists in the world as we know it—from the subtle titillation of a
loving feeling to the construction of a concrete wall—has these four
primary elements. Thus the underlying energy we experience at
Level 2 can now be more precisely described as the unfolding and
enfolding of energy, space, mass, and time.
     Perceiving this expansion was an important bridge for me. If I
found myself in an observer-created reality of anger, it somehow
helped me enormously to experience the implicate commonality
between myself—what I created (anger), and the object of my anger
(another person). By contemplating the common ingredients of
energy, mass, space, time, I gained a kind of textural comprehen-
sion of the underlying unity. It became easier to experience the
illusory nature of the boundaries I was creating and temporarily
believing in, once I realized that my creation (i.e., anger) is com-
prised of energy, space, mass, and time: the observer/creator (me)
is made of energy, space, mass, and time, and the person who is the
object of my angeris made of energy, space, mass, and time. In other
words, we as creators, that which we create, and the recipient or
object of our creation are all made of the same substance.
    Stated in Quantum Psychology terminology, in order for a
problem such as an unwanted emotion to exist, it must possess
              The Stepping Stones of Quantum Consciousness - 19
energy, occupy a space, have measurable mass (solidity), and exist
in time (have duration—a beginning, middle, and an end). Examin-
ing a problem in terms of these four parameters can provide a far
more multi-dimensional framework than the current, binary system
of traditional therapeutic models in which problems are viewed in
a linear cause/effect relationship.
    Level 4 and Level 5 take you into a new realm of primal essnce
and provide exercises that prepare you to tap into the freedom' of
experiencing yourself and your world on a boundless, quantum
level.




                            Level 6
     "Everything interpenetrates everything else."
                                             Dr. David Bohm

     In practical terms, this level removes the iron-curtain divisions
that we typically take for granted. We assume for example, that the
feelings of "I like myself" and "I hate myself' are fundamentally,
irrevocably different—that success is obviously separate from
failure.The world as we know it is overflowing with boundaries that
demarcate the differences.
     At Level 6 we travel through the intoxicating world of David
Bohm's explicate and implicate orders, where what is manifest and
what is invisible are continuously "enfolding" and "unfolding",
where all boundaries are observer-created ratherthan inherent. This
is the quantum bridge that takes us beyond judgments and evalua-
tions and introduces us to the experience of underlying unity. The
sixties' injunction to "go with the flow" is genuinely possible with
the experience of this level. As your Quantum Consciousness of this
level deepens, you will begin to experience the world far beyond the
confines of observer-created realities.
20 - Quantum Consciousness

                            Level 7
    "Everything is made of emptiness and form is condensed
    emptiness." (Einstein) In other words, everything is made
    of the same substance.