Here is a student comment: "When I went from the experience
to the place inside, I found it in my heart; it was like light. I had
trouble sustaining that. It would diminish, then expand, so I found
that when I inhaled, I could control it and make it larger. It was as
if I was playing with that, but I still couldn't sustain it."
      I asked him, "Were you able to find the space beyond that?"
"how do you get beyond that?" he asked. I replied, "You trace it
back focusing on the witness of the breathing. Who is watching the
joy? Your experience was that the joy comes and goes. You were
trying to control it—that was also your experience. Who is witness-
ing not only the coming and going of joy but the attempt to control
its coming and going?"
    What is paramount is that we all focus on something "outside"
ourselves as if, it were responsible for our internal experience. For
example, in a psychotherapy context, often I will meet with people
who are literally addicted to another person. In the literature, they
are called "love addicts."
     Now, in this situation, the other person is an object that the love
addict believes is responsible for their experience. The love addict
believes this so wholeheartedly,thatthe substance,i.e. person, is the
only one that gives them these feelings.
    A major step in the therapy process is to suggest that the
                                         The Energy of Emotions - 85
delightful sensations, which they label as love, are coming from
inside of themselves; It's theirs. As with all the exercises in this
section, we are asked to continually focus on the feelings as made
of energy, not the object of feelings. By doing this, we own our
experience as ours, a major turning point in owning our power.
Normally, we give power to others, blame others, or give credit to
another for our experience. This gives them the power because we
think they are the source of our experience. The exercises move us
to "getting" that our experience is ours.
     Often times, we feel joyful internally, when our outer circum-
stances seem to dictate a different response. Also, at times we feel
disappointed or down, when our external life might indicate we
"should" feelan up. Sometimes clients Ihave seen actually feeltheir
internal responses are inappropriate, as if there is some standard of
what response is appropriate for a particular situation. These
standards of response not only limit us but enable a deep sense of
self-judgenient or self-criticism. People sometimes label them-
selves or are labeled by others as "inappropriate,"by some standard
of society. When seeing responses as energy and observing them
that way, this judgement is gone. We are able to feel what's there in
our bodies.
    "Everyone can transform his impressions ... it is necessary
    to create a transforming agency at the point of intake of
    impressions ... this is the meaning of psychological trans-
    formation." (N icoll, 1984:5 l-52)
    Throughout all these exercises, we are asking for the transfor-
mation of psycho-emotional states. Gurdjieff suggests
self-observation is the change agent. The change agent in Quantum
Psychology, at this level, is observation and seeing the observed as
energy. These exercises are designed to restore you as the source of
your experience. Or, you might say, "these exercises are designed
with your mind in mind."


                         Summary
    As we leave the second level, it is important to reflect back on
the path we traveled. In LevelI, we explored the space between the
thoughts as a wave function. In level I we also looked at the art of
                                                                           1


86 - Quantum Consciousness
observing this wave function as it arose and subsided, into the space.
    In Level II we are asked to see things in more of a quantum
perspective, exploring the nature of our experience in terms of its
energy aspect. What we noticed is that E-motions and feelings are
made of energy, and that if you look at your body, you can feel the
space they occupy.
    One student said, "My anger was rectangular." I said to the
group that she was seeing the shape and boundaries of the anger, and
that by labeling the experience as anger she established boundaries.
As she saw the anger as bounded energy, the boundaries became
more diffused. What becomes important in understanding this is
that the observer puts the label on the experience and, by doing that,
contracts energy into a part-(icle). This part-(icle) has a solidness to
it (mass), occupies a space, and exists in time, as David Bohm has
stated.
     In Chapter III, we talked about the observer, and in this chapter,
the energy function. In the next chapter "Getting to Zero" we will
look at the mass function and how when energy is contracted and
labeled, it is experienced as a part-(icle) losing its connection to the
whole, with mass and size. In the next chapter we discover how the
act of labeling solidifies energy into a part-(icle) and how that part-
(icle) became diffused and transmutes itself when the label is taken
off.
    Why do I emphasize the word "part-(icle)"? Because when we
label undifferentiated energy, we make it a part, separate from the
whole, hence part-(icle). In the next chapter, we willlook at how not
only to own our power or energy, but also how we create our
experience of that energy. This will bring us to Werner Heisenberg's
Uncertainty Principle, "that reality is observer created," and in
terms of Quantum Psychology, how we create our own experience
and interpretation of subjective reality.
Five

                             GETTING TO

                                                     Zero
    Zero grants existence permission to be.
                                                Tarthang Tuiku
                                      Knowledge of Time and Space


    If the preparation of the measurement is modified, the
    properties of the particle will change.
                                                   Fritjof Capra
                                                   Tao of Physics




A robably one of the most exciting and provocative theories in
quantum physics is Werner Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle.
Heisenberg in the mid-1920s was able to demonstrate that the
observer, by the choices he/she made, influenced the outcome of a
physics experiment. For the first time, we as observers of life were

                                 87
88 - Quantum Consciousness
seen as inseparable from life. The observer not only viewed a world
"out there," as Newtonian physics had claimed, but it altered,
influenced, and some physicists would claim, created, what it saw
through the act of observation.

     "What is out there apparently depends, in a rigorous
    mathematical sense, as well as a philosophical one, upon
    what we decide in here. The new physics tells us that an
    observer cannot observe without altering what he sees."
    (Zukav, 1984:185)


                            Level 3
                The observer is the creator of the
              part-(icle)/mass aspect of the universe.


   This theory becomes a major "quantum jump," that Quantum
Psychology develops to help understand human problem states.

Principle: The observer, through the act of observation, creates,
his/her subjective internal response pattern, i.e. their experience.

    "This means that how we subjectively experience events,
    interactions, and our inner self is observer-created ... cre-
    ated by us. This reality suggests a further one: that we, as
    the observers of our experience, choose how an experience
    is experienced. For example, if Isay "I like you," you might
    create any number of responses: (1) "That's nice," (2)
    "They really didn't mean it," (3) "If he only knew what I
    was really like, he'd never feel that way," (4) "I wonder
    what he really wants from me." (Wolinsky, 1991:2-3)

     This principle guides us through Chapter V. Noted physicist
Fred Wolf speculates, "how could there be a mechanical universe
out there, if the universe changed (in here) every time we alter how
we observe it?"
     Because of the active influence exerted by the observer, quan-
tum theorist John Wheeler has added a significant refinement by
                                               Getting to Zero - 89
changing the word observer to the word participator.
     "Zero point" is a term we utilize which includes the observer
plus the ability the observer has to create and construct subjective
reality through the act of observation. Zero point can therefore be
called the point outside of consciousness which observes and
therefore creates and constructs the subjective experience of reality.
    In the early 1930s, the now-famous Copenhagen Debates took
place in an attempt to hash-out the nature of reality according to the
newly developed quantum physics. This nature of perceived, sub-
jective realities is central in our exploration of "zero point".

    "The Copenhagen interpretation properly consists of two
    distinct parts: (1) There is no reality in the absence of
    observation; (2) Observation creates reality. "You create
    your own reality," is the theme of Fred Wolf's Taking the
    Quantum Leap." (Herbert, 1985:17).