There is no answer to the question "From where does this
thought arise?" However, notice what happens as you ask that
question and look for the space from which each thought arose. To
where does that thought arise? If a thought comes by that says "l
don't understand," you immediately say, "That's me. That's me
because I don't understand. l never understood anything'4his is
my story. The benefit is that the more you can observe yourself, the
more distance between you and the thought develops. This begins
to enhance the ability to choose your identifications rather than
finding yourself automatically in the rapids of your mind. Observa-
tion gives you a lever or wedge between you and your mind.
    The first time I worked with a married couple, the woman
stopped her inquiring, looked at me and said,"l'm trying to think of
something to say—l'm always trying to think of something to say."
I interjected, "That's the story of your life," and she answered,
"Yes." The thought "I should say something" went by and she
identified it as herself. She would then run all her internal dialogue
about bow and why she never knew what she should say. A helpful
process for her is to ask, "From where does that thought arise?" No
matter what thought comes to your awareness, ask, "From where
does that thought arise?""l feelafraid to get started?"Ask yourself,
"From where does this thought arise?" As other thoughts arise, keep
asking, "From where does this thought arise?"
    There is a thought called "I'm afraid," when you first came to
the thought "I'm afraid," you identified with it and said, "That's
me." Then suddenly your mind said, "I'm afraid because I don't
have enough money," "I'm fearful because my relationship is
                        Getting Out of the Thick of Tilings - 43
screwed up,""I'm afraid because   " whatever it is. The minute you
identify with any thought, you have all of the associated psycho-
emotional reactions such as "I'm afraid." And your mind will give
you a thousand reasons why you're afraid.




    Practice

    To begin experimenting with this exercise, very gently
    let your eyes close. Each time a thought comes through,
    begin to ask yourself, "From where does this thought
    arise?"




              Quantum Exercise 4

    When a thought arises, ask yourself "to whom does this
    thought arise?" You will probably answer "to me."
    Then ask a second question: "Who is this I?"

    "Keep the attention fixed on finding out the source of
    the "I" thought by asking, as each thought arises, to
    whom the thought arises. If the answer is "I get the
    thought" continue the enquiry by asking "Who is this
    "I." (Godman, 1985)

    This is reminiscent of an old Indian approach of asking
    yourself "Who am I?"I did this inquiring for sometime
    and kept getting more and more answers, which I then
    had to look at. Asking "Who is this I," moved me from
    "being" the thoughts—to observing the thoughts.

    Observe your experience and repeat this process with
    each new thought. Notice the rising and falling of your
    breathing as you notice the rising and subsiding of the
44 - Quantum Consciousness
    different thoughts. As each thought arises, ask "to
    whom does this thought arise?", receive the answer "to
    me," and ask "Who is this I?"

    You can also do this exercise quite effectively with
    another person. Sitting comfortably facing one an-
    other, one person begins by reporting a thought—"I
    feel funny doing this, I'd rather be outside," for ex-
    ample. The partner responds "to whom does this
    thought arise?" "to me," the first person naturally
    responds. "And who is this I?" queries the partner.