Feeling your body supported and noticing your breath-
     ing, go into a quiet space. I would like you now to
     consider for a minute whatever information you have
    about yourself. For example, you're a woman, you're a
     man, you're tall, you're short, fat or thin, or some other
     piece of information. Take a moment to observe that
     information. Now contemplate that not only do I have
    information about myself, but all objects—pictures,
    couches, chairs, lamps—everything has information
    inside itself. Now, letting your eyes open, I'd like you to
    look around the room imagining that everything
    couches and chairs, everything—has information about
    itself. You might want to imagine what that information
    is.



    One student commented, "I felt less alone and more connected
by the possibility that everything has information about itself,
things seem more alive."
238 - Quantum Consciousness


          Quantum Exercise 80
    Desires do not only appear inside me, but they also
    appear inside other objects. (Singh, 1979)

    The exercise begins with eyes closed for two or three
    minutes and then finishes with two or three minutes
    with eyes open.

    Practice

    Group facilitator:

    Feeling your body being physically supported, watch
    your breathing. Observing, notice a cavalcade or a
    parade of your desires. Watch, then, from a distance, as
    if you were in a movie theater watching the desires
    going by on the screen. Take a few minutes to do that.

    Consider for another minute that the desires don't only
    appear inside of me,but that all objects—chairs,couches,
    pictures, lamps, everything—have desires. Just for a
    moment, expand, and imagine everything having de-
    sires.

    Very gently, let your eyes open. And imagine all the
    objects in the room and people as having desires. Guess
    what those desires are. Continue to look at the different
    objects and imagine what their deepest desire is. See if
    you can keep that awareness for a few minutes.



     "When I did this exercise one student shared, "I eventually got
to a chair just wanting to be a chair and a couch just wanting to be
a couch. And the fantasy I imagined was that a couch wants to be a
chair, and the chair wants to be a different color!"
                                                  Consciousness - 239
    One person experienced, "I got the basic impression that
everything desired just to be. It was very freeing to realize that,
because it was as if everybody and everything just wants to exist.
Then I thought, Why are we always doing this stuff about things not
existing, and that whole side of Indian, or whatever, philosophy?"
I decided it was better to concentrate on the being, or the is-ness, or
whatever. And that was very nice."
      I replied, "It's very difficult to be in the world and practice (not
this, not this) Vedanta. It's much easier to practice Kashmir Shavism
or Tantric Yoga (and this, and this). That's the primary reason that
yogis have ahard time implanting themselves in America. It's very
difficult to say to Westerners "not this, not this." Baba Muktananda
was a pure Vedantan until he came to America. He was very
practical, and that's when he adopted Kashmir Shavism. Instead of
"not this not this not this" he adopted "and this and this and this"
which is very appropriate to Western culture, because you can't say
to your landlord, "not this, not this," even if you want too.
     So, as we begin to appreciate the creative aspect of conscious-
ness which makes us aware of our distinctions, we can appreciate,
that consciousness must be there, otherwise, there could be no self
to know itself.
     Let us now look at the physical body as consciousness.


               Quantum Exercise 81

    The body is consciousness (Singh, 1979:97)
    (eyes closed)

    Step I:       Experience your body as made of conscious-
                  ness.

    Step II:      Experience the possibility that every per-
                  son is made of consciousness.

    Step Ill:     Experience the possibility that all objects
                  are made of consciousness.
240 - Quantum Consciousness
   Practice

   Rotating group facilitator:
   (eyes closed)

   Now we're going to be working on seeing our body as
   consciousness. We will sit for about fifteen minutes and
   then another few minutes with eyes open. Find a quiet
   space inside yourself. In this exercise, experience that
   your body is made of consciousness. The way to do that
   is to allow your body to be made of consciousness in one
   spontaneous "movement" rather than doing it piece by
   piece. Hold the feeling, maybe even the sound of the
   body as consciousness.

   What does your body look like? What is it feeling?
   What sounds do you hear when your whole body is
   consciousness? Continue experiencing your body in
   one "movement," being made of consciousness. If any
   thoughts, feelings or sensations come-up, see them as
   made of consciousness. Experience your skin boundary
   as made of consciousness.

   Now allow and consider that the same consciousness
   that is in your body is in other bodies and that all bodies
   are made of the same consciousness. Now experience
   that all objects or things in the world are made of
   consciousness appearing in different shapes or forms.
   Lastly, experience the doer of this exercise as being
   made of the same consciousness as everything else. Very
   gently, let your eyes open, making eye contact with
   other people in the room, experiencing that their bodies
   and your body are made of the same consciousness.
   Continue to make eye contact with other people in the
   room with that awareness.
   0 d 0 0 0 0 000 0 000 00 00 00000 0 000 000 00
                                              Consciousness - 241
     One workshop participant said, "I felt like my body was in Star
Trek where they are beaming people up and their body shimmers in
that in-between place between being solid and disappearing. My
body shimmered."
     Let us take this one step further.


            Quantum Exercise 82
    Focus on the uniwrse as your body. (Singh,
    1979:62)

   Practice

   Rotating group facilitator.'
   (eyes closed)

   Focus on your physical body. Very gently begin to
   experience that everything in the room is your physical
   body, every person, everything. Just expand so that
   everything in the room is part of your physical body.
   Stretch your awareness to include everything in the
   room.

    Then, very gently include the apartment complex or
    house that you live in. Let your awareness stretch,
   expand, to include your apartment complex. Then ex-
   pand to include your neighborhood. Include all that in
   your awareness. Notice that at first there might be a
   little resistance, but just expand gently to include the
   entire neighborhood in your awareness. Gently expand
   to include all of your city so that it's all inside your
   awareness. Gently include your city and the surround-
   ing ones in your awareness. Let your awareness spread
   to include the whole state. Let your awareness expand
   to include neighboring states. Let you awareness ex-
   pand until your awareness includes your part of the
   country, then your half of the country, east or west of
242 - Quantum Consciousness
    the Mississippi. Expand to include allof that ins ide your
    awareness. Now include the entire United States inside
    your awareness. Just gently expand to include it. Then
    drift into Canada, and then into Central America,
    South America. It's easier and easier to include the
    oceans on both sides, Atlantic and Pacific. Include Asia
    and India and Southeast Asia. It becomes much easier
    to include it. Africa. Europe. Keep expanding so you
    include the whole planet inside your awareness. Con-
    tinue to include the solar system, the galaxy, and the
    universe inside your awareness. Whenever you are
    ready, bring your attention back to the room. Let your
    eyes open.



     How can this be of value? All part-(icles) or universes, whether
individual or collective, are made of the same consciousness
(condensed emptiness) as all others. As in parallel universe theory,
all are part-(icles) in emptiness, as mentioned in Chapters IX and X.
They are the same. This means that, metaphorically speaking, we all
have the same mother and father—emptiness and condensed emp-
tiness. This understanding is valuable, because wars, interpersonal
conflicts, and intrapersonal conflicts can be reconciled through the
understanding that we are all made of the same substance and are the
same substance.
    In the Buddhist system, it is said that we have all incarnated so
many times that everyone has been your mother, and you have been
everyone else's mother. This metaphor translates as, "We are all
made of the same substance and therefore are one, whether we are
aware of it or not;" therefore everyone, subatomically is every one
else's mother and father because they are all made of the same
Quantum stuff. Jokingly, in a workshop I said, "This could be a
horrifying thought for many of us who come from abusive homes,
but think of the economic possibilities for those of us who are
therapists—an etemd client!"
    Since so many groups, wars, and conflicts are created through
the use of symbols, as a way of creating differences and separations,
let us now take a look to see how this understanding can help to
alleviate these intemal/extemal controversies.
                                              Consciousness - 243