Hence, the reference point of the original belief, "Life is hard,"
becomes the initial point of reference. And, it will remain so until
the observer can understand, first, that he/she exists prior to his/her
belief, and second, that he/she chose the belief that has become the
filtering system for incoming and outgoing perceptions and expe-
riences. Once an observer "gets" this, experientially, he/she can, in
presenttime, stop creating this filtering system or belief called "Life
is hard."
      A classic example to which we can all relate is feeling inad-
equate or not smart (the first created part-(icle) made through
decision). Next, we try to over-compensate, working very hard to
prove we are not inadequate (Second part-(icle) creation). Notice
that no matter how much we prove or try to prove our adequacy, we
108 - Quantum Consciousness
continually feel the first creation or inadequacy. Even it' we achieve
success, we are always comparing the feeling to our feeling of
inadequacy. In essence, the inadequate feelings become our refer-
ence point!!!

    "Our whole reality is constructed by constantly making
    such comparisons. Our senses, which describe our reality
    to us, are making these comparisons all the time. Unfortu-
    nately, our senses, having no absolute reference line, must
    generate their own relative reference line. But whenever we
    perceive something,,we always perceive differences only,
    whether it be heat or cold, light or darkness, quiet or noisy,
    always compared to relative quantities. We have no abso-
    lute measure of anything, so far as our daily reality is
    concerned (Bentov, 1977:22)

    A client I worked with in therapy, an adolescent, felt inadequate
in comparison to her older sister, who because of her age always
seemed to do everything better and more successfully. My client
came up short whenever she tried to achieve anything on her own.
She perpetually began to compare herself to the "standard" of her
older sister and was unable to be herself. She had fused with her
sister, who had become her internal standard. Whenever she at-
tempted a new way of being, she would automatically compare
herself with the sister and feel the old emotions of inadequacy,
failure and confusion. Her belief, "I want to be an adequate person"
was continually compared with the sister, who was adequate.
Simply put, the observer took a picture of the sister and held it in
consciousness with her feelings of being inadequate in comparison
to her. This is the first creation. She then creates an overcompensat-
ing part-(icle) to prove she's notinadequate. By trying to negate the
first creation, and by resisting it, we set up a dichotomy. The
observer sees the old pictures, associations, memories, and is
unable to choose a new step into a freer consciousness because the
previous creations are what we make our choices from instead of a
clear, open space. Often we hold old pictures there as a way to resist
being like them. It takes energy and effort to continually hold the
picture in place and resist being like it, while, at the same time,
hoping to evolve a different reality. For example, if a person
decides, "I don't want to be like mom, she must always hold a
                                              Getting to Zero - 109
picture of mom in her consciousness, (first creation) so she knows
what not to be (second creation). This means, since the first creation
is strongest she becomes mom and resists being like mom in a
constant internal struggle.


               Quantum Exercise 23

    Step I:      See two standards or part-(icles) in space.
                 (For example, one part-(icle) is the belief "I
                 want to be like my sister," the other part-
                 (icle) could be,"Iwant to be myself, not like
                 my sister."

    Step II:     Merge with one part-(icle) and experience
                 this reality.

    Step Ill:    Merge into the other part-(icle) and experi-
                 ence this reality.

    Step IV:     Step in between the two conflicting parts
                 and experience the emotion between the
                 two part-(icles).

    Step V:      Feel this emotion and conflict (energy) that
                 maintains them in place.

    Step VI:     Now observe the two part-(icles) as made of
                 the same energy.
    Step VII: Notice what occurs.



    When we attempt to resist the first part-(icle) or creation we
continue to re-enforce it. This occurs in thought affirmation when
the original belief or part-(icle) has not been seen as made of the
same energy as the second part-(icle). An affirmation, "Life is
easy," usually is resisting the prior belief, "Life is hard." To
110 - Quantum Consciousness
continue to insist life is easy basically supports or continues to be
linked to the old belief that life is hard. The two conflicting beliefs
are connected. Often in therapy there is an attemptto "get rid" of the
life is hard and keep life is easy. These two constructs are totally
connected so that life is easy creates back life is hard and life is hard
creates back life is easy. Both part-(icles) need to be seen as made
of the same substance-—energy.
      We generally would not insist on a new belief or affirmation
unless we were still linked or believed the prior creation. So as we
write, "I am worthy of making money," we are actually supporting
the old maxim, "I'm unworthy of making money." Each time we
write, "I am worthy of making money," we are re-enforcing its
opposite, earlier-created belief.
   The important point is to be able to appreciate that an observer
constructed thoughts in the mind and placed them on automatic. In
my former book, Trances People Live: Healing Approaches in
Quantum Psychology, the observer creates a response to an event.
If the response, which I called a "trance", works, then the observer
places the response (trance) on automatic. Why is it called a trance?
Because the observer shrinks himself/herself down into a smaller
part-(icle) arid experiences life through or from that part-(icle), or
filter. The observer, by doing this, restricts his/her vision and sees
the world with tunnel vision. (See Illustration #10)
      The principle explored here is "the observer has no preference."
Getting back to zero allows people to view the world without
automatic preferences. A preference comes from a part-(icle) I-
dentity not from the observer. We all may choose to like a particular
food, relationship, color, but the experience is much different when
this choice occurs with no preference or outcome, rather than from
old, learned associations in the mind.
     The zero point process allows the observer to view what occurs
in the mind, rather than attaching, identifying or preferring. This
allows us to step outside the arena of the part-(icle) and release prior
thoughts, associations, emotions, and sensations. This puts us in
present time. These are the components which normally keep us
from remaining in the observer state.
     The question often arises in workshops, "Isn't this like medita-
tion?"
                                             Getting to Zero - 111

                         Illustration 10
     Notice how an observer can see the world with no
     obstruction if there is no part-(icle) blocking the view.
     On the contrary, if the world is viewed from a part-(icle)
     rather than from the observer, the "world view" is
     limited.




    "Meditation (dhynana) is an unbroken flow of thought
    toward the object of concentration. In other words, medita-
    tion is prolonged concentration.... The process of meditation
    is often compared to the pouring of oil from one vessel to
    another, in a steady, unbroken stream." (Isherwood,
    1953:122)

     This suggests, that meditation requires the efforts of focusing
and concentrating. It is hoped this focusing, like placing a magni-
fying glass in sunlight and focusing the heat from the sun in a single
ray, focuses enough energy to burn a leaf. In the same way, focusing
and concentrating will burn the leaf part-(icle). The problem is there
is no responsibility nor acknowledgment that, the one who is
concentrating (the observer) put the leaf or part-(icle) there in the
first place. Meditation is the skill of concentration and brings about
many benefits, but in order to go beyond part-(icle) realities, an
112 - Quantum Consciousness
observer must take responsibility for putting the observed reality
there in the first place, so the observer can stop putting the beliefs
part-(icle) there.


                   East Meets West
    This is where Eastern meditation and physics again join hands
with Western psychotherapy. Western psychotherapy asks clients
to acknowledge and take responsibility for their experience. In
other words, a client constructs his/her subjective experience.
Psychology offers awareness of acreated pattern. It tries to interpret
it, or work through some "old unfinished business," so the pattern
is not repeated again. In Eastern meditation and Sufi traditions, we
are asked to observe, orjust witness the mind, or to concentrate. We
are asked to become so absorbed that the nature of the object will
shine forth; this absorption is termed "samadhi." Quantum physics,
on the other hand, suggests that through the act of observation, we
create what we observe. This is "zero point."

Tradition                         Approach
Sufi and Eastern meditation        Observation
Psychotherapy                      Take responsibility and
                                      acknowledge created reality
Quantum physics                   Observer creates subjective,
                                     observed experience

    Quantum Psychology asks the practitioner (1) to observe (Sufi
and Eastern traditions), (2) take responsibility and experience
subjective reality (Western psychotherapy), and (3) realize the
observer is creating through the act of observation its subjective
thoughts, feelings, etc. (quantum physics).
                                          Getting to Zero - 113