If you feel compelled to be angry in a particular situation, then
you are not free. Similarly, if you cannot tolerate the feeling of
anger, you are not free. Again, imagine a coffee cup in your hand:
the freedom to handle it means being free to pick it up and put it
down when you choose. Needless to say, dealing with human
emotions is far more complicated than picking up and putting down
a cup. On an emotional level, this process occurs along a continuum.
At first, only two percent of people might be willing to feel the
anger, or, for mergers, only two percent of people might be
unwilling to feel the anger and observe. The exercises of Level 1 are
meant to define a pathway of movement for you along this con-
tinuum of being free to experience or to not experience a feeling,
thought, or emotion.
     If you are unwilling to experience a feeling, thought, or emo-
tion, then you can never truly dis-associate from it. You must be
willing to experience and not experience something in order to
move into a genuine space of witnessing or observing.
     If you find that you are unwilling to experience a particular
thought or feeling, intentionally create your resistance to the expe-
rience again and again. Consciously be unwilling to feel it. In
Trances People Live, Healing Approaches in Quantum Psychol-
ogy, I discussed a basic psychodynamic principle that anything you
intentionally create in present time (such as resistance to a particular
experience), you gain power over. In the case of resistance, con-
sciously choosing to experience it automatically depotentiates it.
Paradoxically, allowing yourself to resist eventually dissolves the
resistance. This way of working is elaborated in Chapter 5, "Getting
Back to Zero."
34 - Quantum Consciol's.i'ess

          Where Do Feelings Fit In?
    When we do not accept our feelings and either repress them into
oblivion or judge them as bad. we are creating separation and
boundaries within our personal "'system." Actually judgement of
others or of self is a way we resist experiencing emotions. To
process through judgement simply ask yourself; "By being judge-
mental what experience am I resisting?" What pops-up may give
you the emotion that needs to be observed. These judgements create
divisions and boundaries within individuals which become the
foundation for global division and even war. From a quantum
perspective, when you allow yourself to experience the whole
feeling, or the whole event, then the sense of division disappears.
The basic quantum discovery that "everything is connected to
everything else" would seem less foreign to us, less "far out," if
there were not so much division and separation within us. The point
in the quantum perspective is not to separate yourself from your
emotions and feelings via denial or dissociation, but to observe and
acknowledge them, experience them fully as you observe, and
notice their shapes and boundaries in your mind's eye.
     How to work more directly with emotions is discussed in detail
in the next chapter.

    Most of us are fused or identified with one or more past
traumatic experiences, even if we don't remember what they are.
Once you start observing the contents of your mind, however, you
will begin to see your prejudies, your defense mechanisms, your
wounds—all the parts that you've disallowed and separated from.
Learning to observe the spots of trauma within is the first step
toward healing; it is the first "peace offering" from the wounded
person to the split-off trauma that has been banished from con-
sciousness for so long.
    An Indian teacher, Meher Babm used a wonderful metaphor to
describe this process; "The ego is like an iceberg. Ninety percent of
it is underwater. As we observe it, the submerged begins to move
into the light of observation, and melts in the light of awareness."
      Many years ago I was meditating in my usual way in India. As
l observed my thoughts come and go, I noted a familiar one that
sounded justlike my mother. The thought said,"It's an uphill battle
                           Getting Out of TllE Thick of Things - 35
all the way." Normally, I would have automatically merged with
that thought and experienced the frustration and futility of its
message. This time, however, I was able to observe it and not
identify with it. For the first time, I felt free of the thought and
experienced the open space left by not merging with it.


  What Goes Up Must Come Down
     This first Level can be extremely powerful in helping you to
loosen your sense of identification with each and every experience
that comes your way. Whatever you identify with, you are subject
to its effects. In more colloquial terms, what goes up must come
down. As you notice that thoughts come and go, emotions come and
go, sensations come and go, you realize that there is one common
factor weaving throughout this huge mosaic of experience: You, the
observer of all the comings and goings. Once you, as the observer,
begin to appreciate that you are not your thoughts, feelings, and
emotions,but rather a witnessing presence, agreater clarity emerges.
     Noted Sufi Master G. I. Gurdjieff said,
    A thing cannot observe itself. A thing identical with itself
    cannot see itself, because it is the same as itself, and a thing
    which is the same as itself cannot possibly have a stand-
    point apart from itself, from which to observe itself (Nicoli,
    1984:59).
    What Gurdfieff is pointing to is that since you can be aware of
and observe a thought or feeling, you must be apart from the thought
or feeling. If you were identical to the thoughts or feelings, you
couldn't observe them, or even know about them. Observation and
knowing about something suggests a separation, between it and
you
    Some call this presence the inner self, the essence, the "being."

               Quantum Exercise 2

    To get a sense of thoughts as things that come and go,
    very gently let your eyes close as you sit or lie comfort-
36 - Quantum Consciousness
   ably. Each time a thought crosses your mind, notice it
   and ask yourself, "to where does this thought sub-
   side?"

   As you notice the activity in your mind, it appears at
   first as a pattern of thought...thought...thought.


                       Illustration 1
   For example, notice that your mind might throw-up
   thoughts like "I like my job," "I hate my job," "I love my
   relationship," I hate my relationship," I'm bored,"
   "I'm excited," "I'm tired." To you it appears like this:




    In reality, however, a thought arises and subsides, after
    which there is a momentary space before the next
    thought arises and subsides.
                          Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 37

                         Illustration 2
    Below, we ask the question, "Where does that thought
    subside. Notice, that there is a space where the thought
    subsides, before the next thought arises. Stay in the
    space between two thoughts.




    The space between the two thoughts can be seen as
    Bohm's implicate order, while the thoughts themselves
    can be seen as Bohm's explicate order. We ask ourselves
    the question, "to where does that thought subside?"
    since we are looking for the underlying unity. Tarthang
    Tulku, noted Buddhist teacher, says it this way:


    "as you observe your thoughts passing, watch very
    sensitively for the moment, when one thought fades and
    another arises. This transition is very quick and subtle,
    but involves the momentary availability of a space
    which you can contact and expand. This space has a
    quality of openness, free from the usual discursive and
    discriminative thinking.(Tulku, 1977:58)