Step IV:     The "emotioner" is the emotion, hence, no
                 emotioner.
                             Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 207
Principle: There is no person having associations, just associations
Principle: There is no hearer, just hearing.


              Quanturrl Exercise 65
    Step I:      Notice hearing.

    Step II:     Turn your attention around and try to find
                 who is hearing, and notice there is just
                 hearing with no hearer.

    Step Ill:    Notice that the hearing and hearer are one,
                 hence, no hearer.



     It becomes quite obvious that there is no individual self, just
feeling, hearing, thinking.

Principle: Once conceptual ideas or beliefs are de-constructed,
what is left is "isness."


               Quantum Exercise 66

    Step i:      Look at an object. Pull your attention away
                 from the object, going inward past all con-
                 cepts or knowledge of the object.

    Step II:     Notice the emptiness before the idea of the
                 object arises.

     Step Ill:   Turn your attention around and try to find
                 the perceiver.

     Step IV:    Notice there is no perceiver of the object,
                 just perceiving, hence, no perceiver.
208 - Quantum Consciousness
Principle: "Any time you become willing to experience the void, it
is available." (Wilber, 1981:50)

     "You cannot hear a hearer, because there isn't one. What you
call a hearer is actually just the experience of hearing it, you don't
hear hearing." "The more I try to see the seer, the more its absence
begins to puzzle me.""It seems, ihat whenever we look for a self
apart from the experience, it vanishes. The subject and object
always tum out to be one." (Wilber, 1981)


                        Conclusion
     This chapter and its exercises will bring us to a new plateau. In
the next chapter, we will be asked to make another "quantum jump"
and pole vault over and let go yet another idea of who we are. It is
the idea of who we are that separates us from who we are. In Star
Wars.' The Empire Strikes Back, Yoda, Luke Skywalker's teacher
sums it up as follows; "You must unlearn that which you have
learned."
Ten

                                        The last
                                             Voyage
    The mind is de-void of mind
                     H.H. Dalai Lama, San Jose, CA., 1989.



I think when Captain Kirk in "Star Trek" says, "to go where no
other person has gone before," this can be seen as true in Quantum
Psychology because no one willbe left by the time we complete this
level.
    In the last chapters we have seen, and we hope experienced that
all experiences, the space surrounding them, and the observer/
creator of them are one and the same. This has taken us through the
following steps in our quantum journey.
     As we review each quantum jump, it is important to remember
two things. First of all, Wittgenstein's ladder. To quote world
famous philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein,
210 - Quantum Consciousness
    "My propositions serve as elucidations in the following
    way: anyone who understands me eventually recognizes
    them as nonsensical, when he has used them—as steps
    to climb beyond them. (He must, so to speak, throw away
    the ladder after he has climbed up it.) (Wittgenstein,
    1961:74.)

The 13th-century Sufi Poet, Rumi says it this way,

    "lam a slave of whoever will not at each stage imagine that
    he has arrived at the end of his goal. Many a stage has to be
    left behind before the traveller reaches his destination."
    (Shah, 1976:13)
As a pole vaulterhas to let go of the pole to go over to the other side,
in the same way, the conclusions, beliefs, and ideas of each level are
stepping stones that must be let go of to proceed on our journey.
    Another metaphor is used in India called, "use athom to remove
a thorn." Imagine a thorn stuck in your foot (the problem of not
knowing who you are, separation, pain, etc.). You take another
thorn (Quantum Psychology) to remove the thorn (problem of pain,
etc.) that is stuck in your foot. After the thorn is removed from your
foot, you throw both thorns away (the pain of separation and
Quantum Psychology).
     It is like the old Chinese proverb: when climbing stairs, each
step is important, but to get to the next step you must go beyond or
let go of the one you are standing on. Consequently, although one
levelmight seem to contradict the one prior to it, the beginning steps
are needed before we can go beyond to reach our destination. For
example, in Chapter V, we discovered we are the creator of
experience as wellas the observer of thought, and yet in Chapter IX,
we discover we are beyond the creator of our experience.
    Don't be be fuddled by this; you must first "get" you are the
creator of your experience before you "get" that you are beyond
even this concept, or as Ram Dass used to say,
    "First you have to realize you are in ajail, before you can get out
of it." (Dass, 1972)
                                             The Last Voyage - 211

     Quantum Psychology Summary
             Level 1: Your are the observer or witness
             of your experiences, i.e. thoughts, feel-
             ings, emotions and associations), therefore
             you are more than them.

             Level 2: The universe is made of energy.

             Level 3: The observer is the creator of the
             part-(icle)/mass aspect of the universe.

             Level 4: The time aspect of conscious-
             ness.

             Level 5: The space aspect of conscious-
             ness.

             Level 6: "Everything intapenetrates ev-
             erything else." (David Bohm)

             Level 7:"Everything is made of emptiness
             and form is condensed emptiness."
             (Einstein) In other words, everything is
             made of the same substance.

     Now that we have looked back at our quantum jumps, let's
move forward. As mentioned in Chapter I, Henry Stapp, as quoted
in F. David Peat's Einsteins' Moon, calls Bell's Theorem, "the most
significant discovery in science."
     Bell's Theorem briefly states that "reality is non-local," and
there are no local causes. What does this mean? First, let us look at
the first idea; no location or locality. Further on in the chapter,
experiential exercises will be explored. No location means just that:
there is no location. Why? A location (" I am here," "You are
there,") presupposes, that there is a something that is different from
something else.

    "In reality eveqthing is made of the same kind of sub-
    stance, which I call Quantum stun" (Herbert, 1985:95).

Principle: All locations can only be relative to position.
212 - Quantum Consciousness
    If, everything is made of the same "quantum stuff," then, there
can be no position separate from any other position—hence no
location.


               Quantum Exercise 67

    Step I:      Let your eyes close,and see the empty space.

    Step II:     Notice that the emptiness has already or-
                 ganized itself into an observer observing
                 emptiness.

    Step Ill:    Allow the emptiness to organize into the
                 concept or part-(icle) called separate indi-
                 vidual self.

    Step IV:     Allow the emptiness to organize into an idea
                 called location, (i.e., this observing self has
                 a different location than the observer and
                 observed and the space which surrounds it.

    Step V:      Turn your attention around and "see" what,
                 if anything, did all of that.



   Here, we illustrate that there is only emptiness and condensed
emptiness, and that if its allthe same, even the "you"that makes that
location and distinction is condensed emptiness. This begins the
process of ridding ourselves of the concept of a separate local self,
which causes a particular outcome. Why? Because everything is
connected to everything else and is made of the same substance or
the same Quantum Stuff.

    "Suppose reality consists of ordinary objects which pos-
    sess their attributes innately. Bell's Theorem requires for
    such a world that its objects be connected by non-local
    influences. Bohm's model is an example of such a world.
                                              The Last Voyage - 213
    In this model an invisible field informs the electron of
    environmental changes with a superluminal response time.
    Bell's Theorem shows that the faster-than-light character
    of Bohm's. Without faster-than-light connections, an ordi-
    nary object model of realty simply cannot explain the fact.
    If Bell's theorem is valid, we live in a super luminal reality."
    (Herbert, 1985:5 l)


         Quantum Contemplations
    Contemplate that there is no location.

    Contemplate a universal faster-than-light communication
    between people, objects, etc.

    Contemplate there is no such thing as cause.