Concluding the Experience
    When both you and your partner have completed, or feel
finished and have gone through several plateaus, often it is nice to
find a comfortable position to lie together. At this point the physical
contact might be done without movement. Normally, while kissing,
a partner's tongue is in your mouth moving against your tongue.
Here, although the tongues are touching, there is actually no
movement and attention is focused on the breath. This, can some-
times cause more energy to build. If it does, repeat the cycle again.
If not, just be, keeping the attention on yourself as energy.
     Please remember, this is a deep process that does not have the
goal of orgasm. It is about experiencing a deeper connection to
U




everything. By building up charge and reaching plateaus, you can
experience both an interpersonal interconnection and a personal
orgasm. Your purpose must be clear—that is the quantum approach.


               Quantum Exercise 15

    Focus on the desire in the body as energy,
    rather than on the object or desire.

    Step I:      Either remember a time when you had a
                 desire or notice a present-time desire.

    Step II:     Turn your attention away from the fantasy
                 and notice where in your body you are
                 experiencing this desire.

    Step Ill:    Notice the size and shape of the desire and
                 the feelings associated with the desire.

    Step IV:     De-label the desire. Merge with and Be the
                 desire as energy.

    Step V:      Feel your skin boundaries as being made of
                 the same energy as the energy of desire.
80 - Quantum Consciousness

    Step VI:      Experience the air, the room, the floor, your
                 chair, the rest of the universe including
                 your thoughts as being made of the same
                 energy.

    Step VII: Make eye contact with other members of
                 the group, seeing them as being made of the
                 same energy as you.



    The purpose of this exercise is the same as the others in this
series, which is to move attention from the story, impressions,
fantasy, or images to the delightful feelings as being made of
energy. Simply put, take your attention and your energy, which is
focused on the object of desire, and move it toward the feeling of
desire itself and begin to view the desire as energy. Desires are often
"put down" in many spiritual circles. Desires can, however, be seen
in two ways; (1) Energy to be used or (2) a resistance to rejection or
failure. In the later case when you feel a desire ask yourself; "By
having this desire, what experience am I resisting." If you discover
you are resisting a feeling such as rejection or failure, then use the
earlier quantum exercises. In this way you can see the unwanted or
resisted feelings as energy, and merge with them as energy with no
resistance or intention.



    Practice

    Format the rotating group facilitator might consider.

    I'd like you to sit now for 5 to 10 minutes.Feel your body
    being physically supported, and focus on your breath-
    ing. Begin to develop a desire. Rather than seeing a
    small you on a screen, step into the person in your image
    so that you can see this fantasy from behind your own
    eyes rather than from a distance. From behind your
    own eyes, notice who you're with and what the situation
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 81
     is. Notice if there are any sounds,if there is any particu-
     lar smell or taste. Experience the sensations. Allow the
     fantasy to get stronger and stronger and experience the
     sensations, smells, tastes and sounds. Continue to allow
     the experience to deepen.

    Now, gently pull your attention away from the desire
    and turn your attention into your own body and begin
    to watch the desire, feelings and sensations inside your
    body as you turn your attention toward the feelings and
    sensations of desire. Witness the feelings and sensations
    as energy. Focus your attention on the energy rather
    than the fantasy.

    Continue to watch those sensations as energy. Now
    gently, feeling your body being pressed against the
    floor, the chair or the couch, notice your body being
    supported physically, and notice your breath. Very
    gently, let your eyes open and come back to the room.



     At this time, it is good for the group facilitator to ask for
feedback. Recently at a workshop, a group member asked me,
"Why should I want to get rid of my desires?"I responded that many
Eastern spiritual disciplines suggest being desireless, but I do not.
My suggestion is, rather than chase after a desire and have the
fantasized desire in your mind, be in charge and be the one you're
running after. Notice that the pleasant sensations that are happening
in relation to your desire come from inside of you. Seeing the desire
and pleasant sensations as well as the image of what you are desiring
as energy, brings you back to yourself. This adds choice to the
experience. This works very well for people who are striving for
approval, recognition, and for work-aholics. Each believes, if they
get X, or have X, they will feel pleasant sensations. They are chasing
u



an image created by them. The quantum approach adds responsibil-
ity and choice.
82 - Quantum Consciousness



              Quantum Exercise 16
    Food

    Step I:      Focus your attention on where in your body
                 you experience the desire for food rather
                 than on the fantasy of food.

    Step II:     Witness that desire as made of energy.



    This exercise will plant a seed for you. The method for this
exercise is the same as the others. Let's imagine that you're sitting
at your desk at work, and all of a sudden you have the thought, "I
want a ham on rye" (or whatever your fantasy is). Your mind takes
off on that and you react to it. By the way, if you're fasting, or you
want to lose weight, you can use this exercise when you're hungry.
Focus on the hunger, on the desire for food, rather than on the food
and notice what happens.
    I know for myself, and certainly with the clients I've worked
with, that food is an issue. Particularly under times of stress, we all
want to reach for something to stuff our face with, like chocolate.
One comedian I saw recently said, "Chocolate is the proof that God
exists." The method here is the same as all the previous exercises.
Focus on the sensations and feelings of hunger or the desire for
food, as made of energy. Once again, taking your attention away
from the food fantasy, you focus on the energy itself.



    Practice 1

    Format rotating group facilitator may consider.

    Allow a fantasy of food (chocolate, ice cream, etc.) to
    come into your awareness. Notice where in your body
                                      The Energy of Emotions - 83

    you feel the desire or delightful sensations, i.e. your
    mouth, your stomach, etc. Next, witness these sensa-
    tions as made of energy.

    Practice 2

    Format rotating group facilitator may consider.

    Eyes closed. Take a small piece of chocolate or cake or
    whatever and place it in your mouth. Focus your atten-
    tion on the sensations of delight, i.e., mouth watering,
    rather than the food itself. Keeping a small piece of food
    inside your mouth, experience the delightful sensations
    as energy.



   A student commented, "I've given up cigarettes, I've given up
booze, and now I have to give up food?" "No,"I told him, "I'm not
saying that." The idea is to have a choice. Another student summed
up his reactions with, "It feels like one of the real heavy problem
areas." "Yes," I said, "it's much deeper than sex." You can live,
although it's not much fun, without sex, but you cannot live without
food. The purpose here is choice, and developing the ability to use
all thoughts, feelings, emotions, and sensations as fuel to bring you
back to a more clear, centered state.


              Quantum Exercise 17

    Joy
    Step I:      Find the source of your joy·

    I want to include this exercise because the mind fanta-
    sizes about joyful experiences. You can begin to find
    who you are in relation to them.
84 - Quantum Consciousness

    Practice

    Format rotating group facilitator may consider:

    Notice where and how you are sitting, and imagine a
    very joyful fantasy or experience. As it begins to de-
    velop, notice the delightful feelings inside you. Instead
    of watching a little you in the movie in your mind
    experiencing that joy, imagine unzipping the skin of
    that little person and stepping inside so that you are
    experiencing the joy. Go inside and find the space from
    which that joy arises. Find the source of that joy.

    When you're ready, bring your awareness back, let
    your eyes open, and come back.