A workshop participant once commented, "I can go backward
priorto the impression ofthe object but I still see its color."lreplied,
"You will continue to see the color, but it will no longer register as,
say, the rug in the living room. In other words, the color is still there
and it's not going to disappear, but you're moving, withdrawing
your attention past the thought and impression, even the knowledge
of it. IT IS A VERY DEEP FOCUS, to the space prior to the
knowing."
     One student said, "I feel like I go back to the back of my head
and have to stay there in order to get it. "Exactly," I replied, "you
pull your attention to the space, prior to the knowledge of the object
arising."
     The point of this exercise is to get you to the space prior to
thoughts or impressions or even knowledge of an object. This
allows us to appreciate the space that is constant and yet goes
unnoticed and unacknowledged. These quantum aerobics allow us
to experience the space that is always there, the space we all share.
    Once we can appreciate the space that we all live in, we can
begin to enjoy the medium or the substance that connects us all. For
example, let's say, we are in a swimming pool and that it appears,
at an explicate level, that I am separate from you. We experience
fear, anger, loneliness, etc. If however, we get in touch with the
water as our common connection, we can appreciate not only how
                                   Space: The Final Frontier - 145
we are connected, but that we live in the same, interconnected space
(the water) and hence, effect each other. To illustrate, if I am in a
swimming pool relaxing on my air mattress, and somebody does a
cannonball dive, I am made wet, bumped around, and maybe even
knocked off into the water. If Ican begin to acknowledge the shared
common unity (the water), we might change our actions environ-
mentally as well as emotionally. Why? Because everything shares
a common space. What makes this quite different from most
psychological and spiritual practices is that in psychology you are
concerned with the "content" of what occurred. This is often called
the "foreground". In spiritual disciplines, the focus is on moving
beyond the foreground (thoughts, desires, etc.). Many people are
considered less than pure, not ready, unevolved because their
foreground is looked upon as "bad" or something that needs to be
changed. Quantum Psychology asks the practitionerto focus on the
changeless background (implicate order). Why? Because the fore-
ground (explicate order) always changes, while the background, or
implicate order, remains the same. But, getting in touch with the
background, and acquiring a taste for it, changes the context of your
life—interconnection is enhanced and pain of separation decreases.


             Quantum Exercise 35

    Practice

    Group facilitator: ("pair up with a partner for this next
    exercise." )

    In my workshops, I often jokingly say, "Pair up with
    someone you are unconsciously repulsedby," or"Pair up
    with someone you are unconsciously attracted to." Keep
    the exercises light. This is supposed to befun.

    Let your eyes close for a second, then make eye contact
    with your partner. Let your attention withdraw, pull-
    ing your awareness backward to the space prior to
    knowledge, information, impressions, or thoughts you
146 - Quantum Consciousness
    have about that person. Turn your attention inside,
    withdrawing it backward, toward the back of your
    head. Notice the space prior to your impression of the
    other person. Let your eyes close again. Make eye
    contact with another person, and again gently with-
    draw your attention, prior to any thoughts or
    impressions or information you have about that person.
    Find the space before any thoughts or information.

    A workshop participant commented, "It was like I was feeling
the back of my head from the inside. I was looking from back there
(points to back of head)."
     A student said, "Everything went out of focus and my partner's
eyes looked purple. It was really interesting because what I noticed
was that there was this great big light around everything as soon as
that moment of complete detachment comes."
     Another participant commented, "The focusing happened very
fast for me. Suddenly I was pulsating back and forth, and I was
focusing very fast."
    There are two things to be said in response to this feedback.
Pulsating is "spanda," which as mentioned in Chapter IV, is a
Sanskrit term meaning "the divine pulsation" or"the divine throb."
Second, while in deep focusing, everything loses its form because
we make aform like anger or sadness more solid by our label. When
you pull your attention back subjectively, it loses its solidness, its
label,because you are seeing it from the space, ratherthan from your
ideas or impressions about the object or person.
   This is a good practice to use if you're in a relationship with
somebody and you're in the middle of an argument. If you can
remember to do this exercise with them, begin by looking at them
and pulling your attention backward prior to any impressions or
even knowledge about that person. To do this you have to be willing
to drop all your concepts about how right you are and move past any
impressions, information or knowledge you have about that other
person—to see them from the space prior to. This practice will
begin to dissolve the problem because you move into the space from
which the problem has arisen, or prior to the existence of the
problems. You can practice this all of the time. Seeing and experi-
encing the space prior to the problem helps us to re-member, or
                                    Space: The Final Frontier - 147
become a member again in the common space of which we are all
members.


               Quantum Exercise 36

    Step I:      Notice a thought or feeling you are having.

    Step II:     Withdraw your attention from the thought
                 or feeling prior to any knowledge or infor-
                 mation about what the thought or feeling is.

    Step Ill:    View the thought or E-motion from that
                 space as if you are seeing the thought or
                 feeling for the first time.



    In the classic, Zen Mind, Beginner's Mind, by Shunryu Suzuki,
he is asking for a beginner's mind to see things anew for the first
time.
    "The mind of the beginner is needed throughout Zen
    practice. It is an open mind, the attitude that includes both
    doubt and possibility, the ability to see things always as
    fresh and new. It is needed in all aspects of Life. Beginner's
    mind is the Practice of Zen Mind."
This is what we are asking, to pull your attention back past all
knowledge of internal thoughts, feelings, or external chairs, or
windows and see something from the space prior to the knowledge
of the occurrence. This is beginner's mind.


           Quantum Exercise 37
   Walk around looking at objects, people, thoughts, E-
   motions"as if"this were the first timeyou had ever seen
   them.
148 - Quantum Consciousness
    As I mentioned earlier, I was once in India with a teacher,
Nisargadatta Maharaj. He asked a woman, who was making an
audio tape of his talk for a new book, "What is the name of my next
book?" She replied, "Beyond Consciousness." He said, "no, Prior
to Consciousness. Find the space prior to your thought and stay
there."
     This exercise illustrates the same idea. Prior to any impression,
there is space, the generally overlooked implicate order, which
connects us all. Often people complain, "I need my space." Space
is yours. Nobody can take it away. It is more of a shift in focus to
notice that space is where you come from. You already have your
own space. You just need to acknowledge it.
     Everything in the world has a space, and what you can do is
withdraw your attention from people, situations, and objects, so that
you have your space back.
     A workshop participant asked,"Isn't this withdrawing from the
person and the world, like dissociating?" I said, "no, dissociation
is an automatic defense, usually created during a trauma, to defend
against someone or something. In this practice, we are connecting
space to space. We are acknowledging the space we all share. This
creates an entirely new context for relationship, since, your point of
departure is the interconnected wholeness of the space (implicate
order), rather than the separation and fear of the explicate order. In
this approach, we are acknowledging our connection and similari-
ties first, and separation and differences second, rather than our
habit of doing it the other way around."


              Quantum Exercise 38

    Step I:      Move your eyes quickly from object to ob-
                 ject and find the space between two objects.

    Practice

    All objects and experiences have a space. Also, as
    mentioned in Chapter III, there is a space between two
    objects. By locating the space between two objects,
    whether they are thoughts, feelings, chairs, or tables, we
                                    Space: The Final Frontier - 149
    get back in touch with our common underlying space.
    This can offer us a feeling of interconnection and an
    experience of harmony.