Let your eyes move rapidly, eyes open, from object to
    object in the room very quickly. Find the space between
    two objects. As you focus on one object and then an-
    other, there is a space. Find the space between two
    objects by allowing your eyes to move very rapidly.

    Once again notice how the space is overlooked.



One workshop participant commented, "It was like looking at
frames in a movie or a slide show; as I moved my eyes from object
to object, the space between the frames jumped out at me." Ireplied,
"The space on which the slide show appears is overlooked; that is
the implicate order or background."
      What always gets emphasized is the slide show or story in our
life. Obviously, it is impossible to feel"secure," if we focused on the
slide show (the foreground). It is only possible if we focus on the
changeless background.


              Quantum Exercise 39

    Acknowledging the space around mental
    images.

    Format rotating group facilitator may consider:

    Practice

    Let your eyes close and notice the empty space. Now
    create an image of the beach. Allow the beach to become
    real with feelings, sounds of waves, maybe even a tem-
    perature change, and experience it.
150 - Quantum Consciousness
    Now notice how in order to experience this image, you
    have to not notice the background or space. Expand
    your awareness and notice the space that surrounds the
    experience. Observe how the experience loses its po-
    tency when the background or space is included. Why?
    Because you are expanding your awareness to include
    the changeless space. In psychological terms, you are
    de-potentiating the picture or story by including the
    space in which it occurs or the background.



    As another illustration: (mentioned in Chapter V) imagine
looking at a photograph album with different pictures in it. If you
exclude the background or page on which the pictures are mounted,
the pictures seem more intense. If you shift your awareness, like a
zoom lens camera, and include the page that the picture is on, the
picture looses its intensity. This is the ck-potentiating of a story,
picture, or memory that you hold in your consciousness. In
Ericksonian terms it would be called the de-potentiating of con-
scious mind sets.
     What this means in the context of Quantum Psychology" is that
in our life, we take pictures of the traumas in our life (rape, incest,
etc.), and literally hold them in front of our face and relate to the
world through them. For example, a man who was molested by his
mother might hold that memory of being taken advantage of, and
relate to women with that expectation. Around women he might get
scared, frozen, or withdraw. This is the mind-set which causes post
traumatic stress disorder (P.T.S.D.). By expanding and including
the space in which the picture exists as the context which holds the
picture, the frozen stuckness of the memory is reduced. This allows
the person to relate to women through a larger window thanjustthat
one picture-window. This reduces his P.T.S.D. and de-potentiates
his mind set, thus expanding his world view.
     How to apply this with yourself, or, if you are a therapist, with
another ,will be demonstrated in Chapter JX.
                                    Space: The Final Frontier 0 151



               Quantum Exercise 40

    From space toform.

    Step I:      Letting your eyes close, see the space.

    Step II:     Open your eyes and see the physicalobjects.

    Step Ill:    While looking at the outer forms, keep part
                 of your attention on the space. Let your eyes
                 close for a second, and see the space. And
                 when your eyes are open, see the outer
                 world.

    Practice

    Group facilitator:

    For a second,let your eyes open and see the outer world.
    Now, let your eyes close and see the inner world. Let
    your eyes be open, and world will appear. Let your eyes
    close, and see the space. Continue to open and close your
    eyes until you can keep the background of the space as
    you look at people and objects.



    Once you can "get" the space (inner) and world (outer),let your
attention be split. This means have your attention on the world
outside and on the space inside simultaneously. This takes practice,
but as you begin to develop this skill, you can stay in touch with the
outer world and the inner world simultaneously. Often, most of us
in relationships loose our space by focusing on our partner. Others
of us, lose our connection with our relationship because we stay in
the space. Thus the double bind of either, "Ihave a relationship and
lose myself," or "I have myself and I am alone, and don't have a
relationship." This creates conflicts that arise in relationships
152 - Quantum Consciousness

constantly. Often lam asked in workshops,"How canIhave myself
(my own space) and have a connection with another (relation-
ship)?"
    This exercise suggests you can have both by splitting your
attention inside and outside, so they are equally balanced. P. D.
Ouspensky, a noted mystic and well-known student of Sufi teacher
G. I. Gurdjieff, suggests this approach.

    "When I pay attention to the external world, I am like an
    arrow pointing outwards. When I close my eyes and sink
    into myself my attention becomes an arrow pointing in-
    wards. Now, Itry to do both at once—to point the arrow in
    and out at the same time—l immediately discover that this
    is incredibly difficult. After a second or two, I either forget
    the outside world, and sink into a daydream, or forget
    myself and become absorbed in what I am looking at."
    (Wilson,1980)

    This approach, asks the practitioner to do precisely this tech-
nique of self-remembering. To focus on the space (inside) and the
outer world (outside) simultaneously, and balanced.
     This is a nice exercise, particularly in relationships, to help stay
in touch with your space and your partner simultaneously, or just at
the same time.


              Quantum Exercise 41

    The space at the end of a sound.

    Step I:       Focus your attention on the spaceat the end
                  of a word, a sentence, a voice, or any sound.



     We are looking for the space that is usually unnoticed. Most of
us focus on the words and what they mean to us. This is focus on the
foreground (more on this in Chapters IX and X), rather than
focusing on the background or the space that is always there and is
the same for us all.
                                    Space: The Final Frontier - 153
    We are working with being able to utilize voice, words, sen-
tences that we hear, in essence, using everything that occurs in our
inner and outer world. These exercises can be very valuable in
beginning to put us in touch with this changeless, unified space. One
of the distinguishing characteristics between this and other disci-
plines is that other disciplines require that you schedule in a time to
do a particular "practice." In Quantum Psychology, you can live
your life and enter into the space just by shifting where you put your
attention. In this exercise whether you hear a voice, a plane going
overhead, traffic sounds, a voice inside your head, orthe space at the
end of this word,find the space at the end of the sound and stay there.
If you're listening to a sentence in your mind or to an idea, find the
space at the end of the sound. You're going to sort of drop into that
space, that silence, that void.


    Practice

    The person who is acting as the groupfacilitator reads the
    exercise out loud, very slowly. This allows the participants
    tofocus on the space between his words.

    Let yourself drop into the space or the void after the
    utterance of my voice, the word, or an idea, or any
    sound, or notice the space at the end of a written word.
    Stay in that space. Use every sound inside or outside
    yourself and find the space at the end of it. Anytime you
    want to practice this exercise allyou have to do, whether
    you're driving your car, shopping, or just going about
    your daily errands, is stay focused on the space at the
    end of each word or sound, even in a conversation. This
    will connect you to the underlying space or background
    that is always present right now.



    For homework, I often suggest that we spend some time, in the
next week or so, finding the space at the end of conversations, rather
than focusing on the words. In other words, in conversation, focus
154 - Quantum Consciousness
on the background or space at the end of someone's words rather
than the words themselves.
     As we mentioned in Chapter II, all of us are mostly composed,
at a subatomic level, of space and particles. This next exercise gets
us in touch with the body as space. By doing this exercise, even at
a physical level we can open up the possibility that we are all
surrounded by and made up of the same interconnected space.


             Quantum Exercise 42

    Focus on your skin as being solid. Notice it's
    mass-like quality.

    Consider there is nothing but space inside it.

    Format for a group facilitator: