Exploring the Creation
                of our Realities
     Philosophies look at creation of experience in many ways; zero
point process presents the principle that subjective and internal
experiences of reality are observer created. We choose to see, feel,
and labelexperiences according to our"subjective lens." Removing
the subjective lens allows us to begin the process of seeing through
our quantum lens. Each of us will determine various subjective
responses according to the reality we chose. Obviously we do not
create the physical manifestation of the world, such as the car in the
driveway. Instead we do create our reactions to physicalreality. We
all have many responses which pop-up when we observe a scene,
person, or object. If someone looks at a red car, his/her creation may
be, in a subjective sense, "I like red cars; they're sexy," or "I don't
like red cars; policeman give them to many tickets." All these
responses allow the observer to influence the internal-subjective
responses.
    This principle operates in quantum physics and also in our
internal, psychological response system. One of the goals of the
zero point process is to begin to clear away our automatic observer-
created labels. This transcends the subjective reality we hold in
place by our prior conditioning. We begin to clear out and allow the
space in our consciousness that brings us back to "zero" ... just pure
observation.
104 - Quantum Consciousness
    We then have the opportunity to view reality without prior
thoughts, feelings, emotions, associations, or body responses, which
influence our experience in the moment. In other words, we have the
opportunity to view reality "Without any stuff going oil" Our old
filters are usually prior responses, which were created and left in a
holding pattern and continue to impact our subjective experience.
We become unable to chose a free or unfettered moment in the
present.
    An example could be a traumatic incident, such as, a child
witnessing the death of his mother in an accident with a red car.
Because of the prior experience of horror, pain, grief, shock, and
abandonment, which became associations, all red cars have stigmas
attached to them. The emotional responses of collapse, crying,
feeling intense loss, stopping breathing, etc., also become linked to
this shattering trauma. This complete Gestalt becomes fused with
red cars. No longer is this person free to see a red car without some
internal, prior response and creation. Every time a red car goes by,
there is an odd feeling, avoidance, or memory, that passes through
consciousness because all red cars are linked to this over-whelming
loss. Even years later, shopping, driving, or being a passenger in a
red car evolves into a situation possibly to avoid or dislike intensely.
    The past observer-created reactions are carried into the present;
they have not been released. This individual becomes fused with the
associations, feelings, decisions that appear forever linked with the
trauma. Red cars are never experienced in a free, open way. Instead
they are weighted in experience and consciousness with this past
collection of umesolved creations.
    In relationships, often we are weighted down by past abandon-
ments, betrayals. This, in our present-time relationship keeps us
distanced and guarded. In essence, we are taking past upsets and
projecting them into the present and future. Therefore, we stay
closed in treating past-time relationships as though they occur in
present time.

Principle: Once the observer decides a reality is true, there is a
tendency to maintain that reality by automatically creating it repeat-
edly.
                                              Getting to Zero - 105
    The ability to choose becomes lost in this rigid boundary, which
can influence the present, although the person remains unaware of
this prior decision. Once, when a women was participating in
therapy, she remembered an incident that had been traumatic for her
as young child. She had discovered her parents making love in the
shower. Her father yelled at her and she was frozen with fear, terror,·
and confusion. Her attention became fixed on a toothbrush; this
helped absorb her attention away from the painful experience. The
observer of her experience labeled the trauma as fearful, and her
bodily response and psychological response became one of intense
fear. Years later, as an adult, when she wished to make love with her
husband the automatic fear response, which manifested in a feeling
of frozenness, kept manifesting. The old response was again re-
created from the automatic response of the observer-created reality.
Somehow, every time she saw a tooth-brush in the bathroom,
unknowingly the past association operated and she would feel a
"sense" of fear.


               Quantum Exercise 22
    Step I:      Remember an automatic response that re-
                 occurs in your life.

    Step II:     Watch the response.

    Step Ill:    Notice the automatic feelings, associations,
                 emotions, body responses that seem to "hap-
                 pen to you," automatically. This is the
                 experience that occurs when automatic ob-
                 server created realities continue to generate.

    Step IV:     Observe and intentionally create the
                 thought, feeling or memory. Make a xerox
                 copy of the thought, feeling, or memory.

    Step V:      See the "pop-up" (thought, feeling or
                 memory) as energy.
106 - Quantum Consciousness
    Many therapies put emphasis on what occurred in childhood.
Look instead at how the incident becomes time frozen and held in
place by the observer. The observer, who is not time bound and
linear, creates this experience in time. Time appears to anchor it.
The frozen incident seems like it is always present. Instead the
observer continues to create it, and the reactions to it and around it,
or in response to it. The principle follows that the observer creates
the subjective internalexperience, not the actual event, and then the
observer pretends not to have create the internal experience.
     For example, many times you might be walking along or
chatting with a friend, and anger or sadness, or a sudden "uncom-
fortable" feeling might emerge inside of you. "Where did this come
from?" you ask yourself. "Why am I feeling this way?" The
appearance is that the feeling "happened" to you. The observer re-
creates the experience and then pretended not to, as if he/she (the
observer) had nothing to do with it.
    Another example could be having a difference of opinion with
your spouse. One part of you responds with hurt, the other with
anger. Each feels the emotion just happened to them; instead each
had something to do with it. One friend of mine used to say, "I
realized that no matter what happened to me in my life good or bad
that there was always the same person there—me, (the observer). I
realized that I must have had something to do with it."
     Instead of asking, "Where is this anger coming from?" look at
the creation of the emotion, attitude, belief. Generally, we have
evolved through therapy, spiritual practice, or the general hard
knocks of life, into allowing and accepting our feelings. The most
important thing I got from years of therapy was it was okay to feel
what I was feeling and to be where I was. The next step is to"grok "
(get) that we are responsible for and created and constructed these
beliefs that yield feelings. We do this knowingly or unknowingly
through the act of observation.*


                       Conflicting Beliefs
     If we become absorbed in creating our subjective realities, our
responses to particular situations, why are new realities or internal

*This process of labeling is discussed by Dr. Albert Eilis, the founder of Cognitive Therapy.
                                               Getting to Zero - 107
programs so difficult to change? Many proponents of new age
therapies attempt to alter consciousness, as do proponents of
education or hypnosis. They present the hypothesis that we can
create new ways of being through visualization, the power of
positive thinking, meditations, self-hypnosis, affirmations, or the
act of the unconscious mind. These methods often suggest we
disallow negative associations or thoughts through affirmation or
reassociation. Two important pieces are missed in these processes.

Principle: One cannot maintain a new reality against the existing,
prior-created reality.

     This practice sets up an increased resistance to change. The
realities become oppositional. An example would be attempting to
believe a new reality of "life is easy." Unfortunately, the old
creation or belief of "life is hard" still exists in consciousness. One
creation cannot be overcome by another. A positive thought, deci-
sion, or reassociation does not have more mass or power to override
a negative thought, decision, reassociation or creation. The existing
thought must be dealt with because it was created first and remains
in consciousness.

Principle: The first belief that is created becomes a person's point
of reference and therefore carries the most power. It becomes the
person's standard to measure experience.