"This idea of work is psychological transformation—the
    transformation of oneself. Transformation means chang-
    ing one thing into a different thing." (Nicoli, 1984:50).
    To the self-explorer, therapist, spiritual aspirant, or the indi-
vidual exploring consciousness, it is imperative to understand why
E-motions, events or situations are experienced the way they are.
Anger without a label is energy in a different form than sadness.
Sadness is energy in a different form than hate. Once experienced
without labels, the judgement (I should not feel the anger), evalu-
ation (anger is bad), and significance (What does feeling anger
mean about me, or what will people think of me if I'm angry?), is
removed, and we are all left with just energy. Energy with no label
is hardly something to feelbad about, and one workshop participant
remarked after doing the exercises,"There is no reason to resist the
experience of anger, it is just energy, and just Is."
    This is an effortless process. Consciousness transmutes itsejf.
This is not a process of using effort to change one thing into another,
because an individual "imagines" this or that is better. Here lie the
subtle judgments, which lock the experience in space and time.
Normally, psychology leaves us in the predicament of either ex-
pressing or repressing feelings that are judged through priorlearnings
as bad or unwanted. Transmutation affords the opportunity to add
a third alternative to expression, or repression, namely transmuta-
tion. By seeing the E-motion as energy, transformation occurs.
    Merely by observing or watching E-motions, thoughts and
feelings as they are (namely energy), the "experience" transmutes
itself. In the Sufi work of Gurdjieff and Ouspensky, self-observa-
tion yields transformation. From my own experience,
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 57
self-observation only yielded more self-observation and more in-
ternal states to observe.
    From a Quantum Psychology perspective, we are adding on, to
self-observation, the de-labeling or de-framing process, which is
experiencing E-motions as energy. In order for anything to exist in
the physical universe, it must have energy.


         Quantum Contemplations
    If emotions, such as anger, fear, etc. did not have energy in

,   them, would they be a problem?

    Can a problem state exist, if it has no energy?


              The Quantum Touch
   The add-on to these profound Sufi teachings is the Quantum
much, namely observing the E-motions as energy. This de-labeling
or de-framing causes a transmutation in the experience of E-
motions and is where the transformation takes place. The Quantum
touch acts like a philosopher's stone. In alchemy, the metaphor of
the philosopher's stone transforms metals into gold (your true self).
In the same way, observing E-motions as energy acts as a
philosopher's stone, returning you to yourself (The Gold). This is
[ransformation. Noted psychiatrist Carl Jung, M.D. felt strongly
about the use of emotions as energy. Jung suggested:

    "In the intensity of the emotional disturbance itself lies the
    value, the energy which he should have at his deepest
    disposal in order to remedy the state of reduced adapta-
    tion." (Jung, 1960).
    What follows are the steps to transmute thoughts, feelings, E-
motions, and sensations. You, as the observer of an experience put
the label on. The following Quantum exercises can be used to take
the label off and experience experiences as they are. The exercises
can be done in a group, in pairs, or individually. The following are
2-motions which are frequently defined by people as problem
58 - Quantum Consciousness
states. The purpose is to give us a chance to practice the exercises
and notice what occurs. Please note that Quantum Psychology is not
a spectator sport; experiencing is its cornerstone. Practice is essen-
tial.
    The purpose of the following exercise is to help you begin to
transmute your experiences so that psycho-emotional energies are
experienced as pure energy which appear in different shapes or
forms. This allows us to move forward into a deeper sense of self,
since psychic energy is no longer drained off in resistance to a
created label. As mentioned earlier, if I label energy as anger,
"which is bad," then Iwill resist my own created label. Throughout
this group of Quantum exercises we are asked to de-label and
experience E-motions as made of energy.



                Quantum Exercise 9

    Working with your fear.

    Step I:      Recall a story or memory about when you
                 felt fear.

    Step II:     Allow the fear to manifest.

    Step Ill:    Notice where in your body the fear is occur-
                 ring.

    Step IV:     Take your attention off the story as to why
                 you feel fear.

    Step V:      Put your attention and focus on the fear
                 itself; now delabel it seeing it as energy.

    Step VI:     If you are working in a group, make eye
                 contact with different group members, see-
                 ing the energy inside of them as being made
                 of the same energy as the energy within
                 yourself.
                                        The Energy of Emotions - 59
    When you feel afraid, your mind gives you many rea-
    sons why you're afraid. Normally people focus their
    attention on the story about why they are afraid. In this
    exercise you turn your attention from the story and put
    it on the fear itself. Where is the fear in your body?
    Begin to focus your attention on the fear itself.

    Practice

    A rotating group leader may consider reading this slowly,
    as a format for practice.

    "Begin by remembering a past event or something that
    you're imagining will happen in the future that is
    associated with fear. It could have been last week, it
    could have been last month, it could have been lastyear.
    Let a memory of something you're afraid of come into
    your mind. Notice what kind of clothes you are wearing
    in the story, what color they are. Notice if there are any
    other people in the memory or movie in you mind's eye.
    Experience any sounds you hear in the movie. Observe
    the feelings of fear you have and where it is in your body.
    Let your movie or story really develop. Now, as it
    reaches a level of intense feeling, very gently, take your
    attention from the movie and move your attention to the
    fear itself, or the emotion itself. Notice where in your
    body your feeling of fear is. Focus your attention on the
    fear in your body. Where is it? Every time your mind
    wants to go to the story or movie about why you're
    afraid, move it gently to the feelings of the fear itself.
    Begin to view that fear simply as energy. Continue to see
    the fear as energy. Remember, your task is to see it as it
    is, not to change it, move it, or offer it to God. Just see
    it as energy. DON'T try to change it."



  Why? Because if you are trying to get rid of or change anything,
you are resisting it. In the Sufi tradition the energy is referred to as
60 - Quantum Consciousness
the scoIpion, and the label placed on the energy as the perfume. To
add a label to pure energy is like adding perfume to a scorpion.
Why? Because you will experience the label or perfume not the
underlying energy.
    Therefore it is said, "Whoever would perfume a scorpion
    will not thereby escape its sting."—Bahaudin(Shah, 1978).