The purpose of this exercise is to begin to sense the difference
between the "transient i's"—the changing identities associated
with the different thoughts—and the steadying presence of the
observer, which is always there, watching the mental parade.
Without the observer, most of us go through the day flip-flopping
back and forth amidst the waves of our thoughts. With the crest of
each wave, we bob around at the mercy of the next wave.
     An example: My alarm clock rings one morning, as it usually
does, at 7:00 a.m. My first thought is, "I'm tired, I don't want to go
to work." Instantaneously, I identify with the thought. In essence,
I say to myself "That's me—I'm tired and I don't want to go to
work."
     After breakfast, a thought goes by,"Ican hardly waitto telljack
about my new idea for redesigning the training program."The same
instantaneous identification takes place. "That's me—l have a great
idea." Suddenly I feel energized and excited about my work.
    Now it's 10:30 in the morning and a thought goes by, "I'm
bored, why did I pick this career?"The nonverbalized identification
kicks in—"That's me—l'm bored with my job." By noon I'm
thinking,"I'm really looking forward to my meeting with Lillian-
she's so stimulating to discuss new ideas and problems with." The
implicit aspect of this dynamic is the same as in all the other
instances: "That's me—l can't wait to talk to Lillian."
    The next morning I wake up and look at my partner lying next
to me and a thought goes by that says, "Why am I in this relation-
ship'?" Instantaneously identify with the thought: "That's me—"I
                           Getting Out of THE Thick of Things - 45
want out of this relationship"..."I never should have gotten mar-
ried." I could have so much more freedom." At breakfast I find that
I am having a pleasant conversation with my partner. "This is really
comforting," I think, "I like the stability."
      During my mid-morning break, an attractive person walks past
me in the corridor and I think, "I'd like to meet that person,"
followed by, "Maybe I'd be better off single...I could do exactly
what I want..."
      Sound tediously familiar?
      The point of this example is to provide a sense of how the mind
is always changing its mind, so to speak. When we identify with
each and every thought, we ride an emotional roller coaster.
Learning to observe and witness takes more and more of the tumult
out of daily experience. The mind will still generate its geyser of
ever-changing wants, opinions, and demands, but the you that
observes your mind will develop an equilibrium. Instead of whip-
ping through the day on a roller coaster, you will begin to glide on
still waters.
      Is there an answertothe question "Who is this I?"No. The point
of the exercise is to move you out of the typical, transient experience
of being the subject who is identified with each and every varying
state ("lam no good") to a less familiar experience of yourself as an
observing presence. The experience of "I"—which is generally so
personal, so subjective, so attached—becomes more objectified
and the intense feelings of identification begin to lessen.
      In Quantum Exercise 2, we learned to experience the space or
emptiness between two thoughts. Here you are learning to experi-
ence oneself as being separate from the comings and going of the
mind.
      By practicing the exercises in Level 1, in which you learn to
experience the space (the changeless implicate order) between your
thoughts and identifications (the ever-changing explicate order),
you can begin to experience a sense of equilibrium rather than riding
the waves of your ever-changing mind.
      After I had been observing my thoughts for a period of time, I
went to my teacher, Nisargadatta Maharaj, and said "I feel like I'm
thinking more and more when I witness ail these thoughts coming
and going. Am I thinking more or observing more?"
      He said, "You're observing more, so you're more aware of
46 - Quantum Consciousness
more of your thoughts. Therefore, it feels uncomfortable. It's just a
phase."
      I said, "It's a long phase!"
      Anything you believe about yourself is limiting. I feel good, I
feel lousy, I'm too tall, I hate myself, I can't cope, I'm no good at
relationships—each of these we experience as separate psycho-
emotional states with separate waves of feelings, sensations, and
emotions. In quantum terms, however, each thought is a part-(icle)
of energy surrounded by space and, as mentioned earlier, can be
experienced as a wave of energy arising out of and subsiding back
into emptiness. Actually, the word quantum comesPom the word
quanta, meaning energy packet. In the same way, each experience
is like a packet of energy. This is why we can experience thoughts,
feelings, emotions, etc. with such "energeticforce." If we were to
look through our quantum lens, we would see that all the particles
or waves look alike. The implication of this quantum reality on a
psychological levelis that allthe oscillating emotional and psycho-
logical states (part-ides or waves) we experience as being so
remarkably different are, in fact, not fundamentally different. To
the degree to which we identify with the states (or particles/waves)
as being different, we go up and down emotionally.
     A workshop participant once commented, "It seemed as though
I was witnessing and going into the space primarily, and then there
were thoughts going on, but Icouldn't pay attention to them. Rather
than focusing on them, it was as if I had gotten beyond them."
Another trainee commented, "When I use the approach, I experi-
ence my thoughts slowing down in a rhythm. The shift is subtle, but
I do experience a distancing from whatever the thought and internal
experience was."


              Quantum Exercise 5

    Whenever a thought arises ask, "Who is witnessing?"
    Answer "I am."

    If you look at your experiences, you'll see that you are
    always witnessing your thoughts. In fact, if you ask
    yourself, "Who has always been there witnessing what-
                           Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 47
    ever has happened to me," it is clear that you were. The
    question to ask yourself in this exercise is "Who is
    witnessing." Answer "I am." This exercise can be done
    by pairing up with a partner. Person A says whatever
    comes into his/her mind. Person B asks "who is witness-
    ing that?" Person A replies "I am." Whatever comes up,
    person B continues to ask "who is the witness?" Person
    A replies, "I am." Do this for about five minutes each.

    The next step is to sit quietly and ask yourself, "who is
    witnessing?" Answer "I am."



    One person in a workshop commented, "My experience was
that of realizing that there is two of me: a witness and the other being
who continually has thoughts." Another workshop participant
commented, "It was so obvious that Ican't believe I overlooked that
I was always there no matter what thoughts or feeling came and
went...very freeing."



               Quantum Exercise 6

    Sit with your eyes closed, and notice all the transient
    "i's" that come and go. For example,"i feel good,""i feel
    bad," "i like myself," "i don't like myself."

    Focus your attention on the permanent I, the I or witness
    that observes all the transient "i's."

    Practice

    Possible format for rotating group facilitator:

    "Notice the sounds around you. Feel your body pressed
    up against the seat. Begin to focus on the thought-free I,
    the presence behind all of the pseudo-i's. Notice what-
48 - Quantum Consciousness
    ever sounds are around you, and again focus your
    attention on the thought-free I, the presence behind all
    the pseudo-i's. Very gently, bring your awareness back
    to the room, and, whenever you're ready, let your eyes
    open."



      In the next exercise anything that comes into your awareness
should be seen as an object. So, "I feel good" can be viewed as an
object and witnessed. "I like being here"can be viewedas an object.
"I wish I weren't here" can be viewed as an ohiect. "I feel a lot of
love" can be viewed as an object and witnessed. I remember in the
first class in the series I taught, a student said that he was feeling a
lot of bliss with this exercise. He said that when he viewed the bliss
as an object and observed, he shijfted into a space where he had
never been before. Usually, we take a feeling like bliss and go,"I'm
in bliss," and later crash. He was able to move it to an object and
observe.
    See what the experience is. And if something says, "This is a
neat experience," then you want to reduce "This is a neat experi-
ence" to an object. The next thought is "I really like doing this, that
feels neat" and you start feeling "neat." Move "lfeel neat" to an
object. Whatever it is, reduce it to an object.


               Quantum Exercise 7

    Any thought can be objectified.

    When a thought arises, make it into an object and
    witness it. Make anything that comes into your aware-
    ness into an object and observe.

    Practice

    Possible format for facilitator: