Step Ill:    Notice the difference between you and the
                observer by asking yourself, "What is the
                difference between me and the observer?"
200 - Quantum Consciousness
    Step IV:     See the observer and its object (the ob-
                 served experience) as the same substance.

    Step V:      Notice what happens.


Principle: Every time a problem arises, note that the problem state,
the experiencer of the problem, and the problem, have no inherent
self-nature; i.e., they are not separate from each other.

Buddhist literature often uses the term self-nature, that one has no
inherent self nature. What this translates to is that the observer and
the observed and the empty-space surrounding it are all made of the
same quantum field or emptiness. In order to have a separate self,
things would be required to be made of different substances.
    In other words, perceive the observer of the problem and the
problem to be one. Allow them to be one. When they are seen as one
everything merges and loses its contrastness.
    Since everything is interdependent and inter-penetrates every-
thing else, there is no independent nature. Once this is noticed, the
problem de-constructs, because there are no contrasts.

Principle: The observer and the observed are made of the same
quantum field or emptiness. The observer arises with the observed
simultaneously, and subsides simultaneously.


          Quantum Exercise 59
    The observer and observed arise and subside
    together.

    Step I:      Notice an experience.

    Step II:     Notice the observer of an experience.

    Step Ill:    Notice the difference between you and the
                 observer.
                              Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 201
      Step IV:   Allow the observer and object (observed) to
                 arise and subside together.




          There Is Not One Observer
    In order to go beyond the observer and the observed, we must
understand that each I-dentity has an observer. In other words the
observer and observed is a unit. It appears as though each "I" arises
independent of an observer and that the same observer observes all
of these different "i's". Actually, each "I" has its own observer.
What are we left with when the observer-observed are seen as one
unit and made of the same substance? We are left with what the
famous Indian teacher Ramana Maharish; called the "I-I". In the
fourth way tradition of G.l. Gurdjieff it is called "the Real I." In
Quantum Psychology we call it a no-state state, where there is
knowing without a knower or awareness with no object to be aware
of.


      Quantum Exercise Made Simple
      1. Notice an I-dentity, part-(icle), or experience that is
         occurring.

      2. Notice an observer observing the "I".
      3. Ask yourself, "What observer is observing this I-
         dentity, part-(icle) or experience?"
      4. Notice what happens.


      The Appearance of the Observer
      To re-state, it appears as though there is only one stable
observer observing everything coming and going. There is actually
an observer which arises with each event. The observer and ob-
served arise and subside together. This subtle understanding and
experience moves us beyond the observer/observed dyad into the I-
I, Real I, or no-state state.
202 - Quantum Consciousness
    At this level we can begin to understand and appreciate that not
only is the observer-observed a unit, they are made of condensed
emptiness. The observer, so important in many traditions, is actu-
ally a part-(icle) I-dentity. Although it can be argued that it is a
higher I-dentity than an ordimuy I-dentity, it is still an I-dentity.
     As we trace our path from Level l we can see the necessity of
splitting off the personality into observer-observed. At this level,
however, we can see that to be aware of the observer, or being aware
of being aware, leads us to a place beyond ordinary observer-
observed reality. To restate Bentov,

    "Our objective reality is composed of a void full of pulsat-
    ing fields. If we stop the pulsation of the fields, we get back
    to the absolute." (Bentov, 1977:67)

   What Bentov is suggesting here is that this process is like a
pendulum. The observer and his/her experience go from the emp-
tiness at the top of the swing to condensed emptiness. The pendulum
moves, then it stops and thins-out before it condenses in its move-
ment. Bentov suggests that this cycle occurs up to 14 times a second.




                        Illustration 13
Notice that emptiness condenses and thins-out like the motion of a
pendulum. This can be likened to the Spanda or divine pulsation
discussed in ChapterIII, where form becomes emptiness, emptiness
becomes form. This understanding is the Heart Sutra and is the heart
of Buddhism.
                              Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 203
    This means that whether we know itor not, we are experiencing
no contrasts and quantum consciousness 14 times a second. Why
don't we know it? Because without acontrast in the emptiness atthe
top of the swing of the pendulum, there is no "you" to observe it.


                    Quantum Jump
      In the earlier chapters we discussed "observation creates real-
ity." Here we will focus on yet another aspect of Quantum reality:
There is no reality in the absence of observation."(Herbert, 1985:17)


              Quantum Exercise 60

    This exercise relates back to the chapter on time. A major
    illusion, is that the observer was "there" observing before
    the observed or object (feeling, thought, etc.) arose. Many
    New Agers and practitioners of Eastern religion talk of the
    witness either creating or always being there, "as if you
    were the observer."

    In Chapters Ill, IV and V, we are asked to be the witness or
    observer. Notice how the observer creates reality through
    the act of observation. Here, we are asked to make the
    "quantum jump" like a pole vaulter and leave that step-
    ping stone behind us. Earlier we are asked to pierce through
    another illusion of time, and realize that you as the witness
    or observer were there before the observed. In this Quan-
   tumjump we go even more deeply into the observed and the
   observer, not only being the same substance, but they arise
   and subside together.



   Step I:       Notice an experience.

   Step II:      Notice the observer of an experience.
204 - Quantum Consciousness
    Step Ill:    Notice the difference between you and the
                 observer.

    Step IV:     Allow the observer and object (observed)
                 (thought or emotions, etc.) to arise and
                 subside together.

    Step V:      Notice the no you—you that is present dur-
                 ing the rising and subsiding.




          Quantum Contemplation
    If there were no "you"to be doing the observing, would you
    know that a problem existed?

    Consider.' If there were no "you" there to observe a prob-
    lem,there would be nobody there to know it was a problem.


    In Ken Wilber's No Boundary he states,"There is no boundary
between subject and object, self and non-self, seer and seen."
(Wilber, 1981:40).
    What Wilber is saying here is exactly what this exercise is
asking you to experience, that the observer and observed are the
same; there is no boundary between them. Many disciplines have
suggested multitudes of ways to destroy or get rid of this observer/
observed boundary. Wilber states,

    "We really don't have to go to the trouble of trying to
    destroy the primary boundary, and for an extremely simple
    reason: the primary boundary doesn't exist at all." (Wilber,
    1981:47)

    Let me relate this back to the time I was in Santa Rosa,
California in 1988. Sitting in my meditation room, I decided to look
for the one that was reading quantum physics and doing all these
psycho-spiritual practices for so many years. When I turned my
attention around and tried to find the self who was doing this, I
                               Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 205
couldn't find it. There was nothing there. The seeker wasn't there.
I realized the seeker and the sought are made of the same substance.

Principle: There is no thinker, only thinking.


                Quantum Exercise 61
    Step I:      Notice a thought passing by.

    Step II:     Turn your attention around and try to find
                 whois thinkingthe thoughtand notice there
                 is none.

    Step Ill:    Notice that there is no thinker—just think-
                 ing. The Thinker is the Thinking.

    Step IV:     The thinker and the thinkingare one, hence,
                 no thinker.



Principle: There is no feeler.


               Quantum Exercise 62
    Step I:      Notice a feeling.

    Step II:     Turn your attention around and try to find
                 who is feeling the feeling, and notice there is
                just feeling with no feeler.

    Step Ill:    Notice that there is no "you" feeling, just
                 feeling.

    Step IV:     The feeler is the feeling, hence, there is no
                 feeler.
206 - Quantum Consciousness
Principle: There is no sensor.


               Quantum Exercise 63

    Step I:     Notice a sensation.

    Step II:    Turn your attention around and try to find
                who is sensing the sensation, and notice the
                sensor is the sensation of sensing.

    Step Ill:   Notice that there is no "you" sensing, just
                sensation sensing.

    Step IV:    The sensor is the sensation, hence, no sen-
                sor.




               Quantum Exercise 64

    Step I:      Notice an emotion.

    Step II:    Turn your attentkm around and try to find
                who is having emotions, and notice there is
                just emotions, with no person having the
                emotions.

    Step Ill:    Notice that there is no "you" having emo-
                 tions.