As you see the sexual sensation as energy, a plateau is reached.
Then through sexual activity, the charge is built up again and at the
moment of charge you turn your attention around and see the
sensations as energy, another plateau. Working at higher and higher
plateaus without discharging the energy causes an "expansion of
knowledge" which is tantra.
   Many books have been written on this subject, and Icannot say
what happens for a woman. For a man, however, when he sees the
sexual energy as energy and plateaus, he will generally loose his
erection. Then the sexual process must continue on to build charge.
The purpose of expansion of knowledge must be clear, otherwise
there will be a discharge (orgasm) at an early stage.
    There is a wonderful phrase from an ancient yoga text, para-
phrased, "If at the moment of orgasm, one could become introverted
(and see the sensations as energy), one would experience the divine
pulsation." The thought that is omitted is, "if at the moment of
orgasm, you could remember.'
74 - Quantum Consciousness

                 A Quantum Look
     Here we want to add to the steps mentioned at the beginning of
the chapter. Physicist David Bohm said, "Everything interpen-
etrates everything else" ( no pun intended). What this means, when
we consider E-motions as well as the pleasant sensations of sex, is
that not only is the sexual sensation energy, when de-labeled and
seen as energy, but so are the skin boundaries of our body, the skin
itself, our partnerand what we call"I."Therefore, the quantum add-
on to Reich and tantra is to not only see the sexual sensations as
energy, but also your thoughts, fantasies in your mind, skin bound-
ary, the world that surrounds the "I" and ultimately the "I" that is
looking. In this way, our"individuality"begins to expand to include
everything else.
     So, you can experience your skin boundary as energy,the air as
energy, the walls, your partner as energy, the state of New Mexico
or any state you find yourself in, etc.



                        Illustration 5
                                     The Energy of Emotions - 75
    Here we have seen the background or context for working with
sex. Now comes the fun part, practicing. Part l willbe working with
fantasies. Part 2 will be working with a sexual partner.


          Quantum Exercise 14
   Part 1: Sexual practice for individuals with
   fantasies, or as a guided practice in pairs or
   in a group. (Singh, 1979)

    Step I:     Either remember a time, notice your present
                sexual experience, or have a sexual fantasy.

    Step II:    Turn your attention away from the sexual
                fantasy and notice where in your body you
                are experiencing sexual sensations.

    Step Ill:    Experience the size and shape of the sexual
                 feelings.

    Step IV:     De-label the sexual energy, seeing it as en-
                 ergy and merge with it.

    Step V:      Feel your skin boundaries as being made of
                 the same energy as the "sexual" energy.

    Step VI:     Experience the air,the room, the floor, your
                 chair, the rest of the universe including
                 your thoughts as being made of the same
                 energy.



    If you have sexual fantasies (I know none of you do, but if you
do) focus your attention on the sexual fantasy, or the story or the
object of your sexual fantasy. Your mind is creating impressions of
the sexual fantasy in some form or other. When I was celibate for
about five years, I noticed that during the first three years I was
76 - Quantum Consciousness
going through incredible fantasies. Since the fantasies were still
there, so were the bodily sensations. I had a difficult time for three
years. All of a sudden I started to practice, and the practice changed
my focus from putting my awareness on the fantasy to putting it on
the energy itself. Where do I feel it? It's exactly the same as all of
the E-motional issues, except that now we're working with a more
"pleasant" one.
    Rather than focusing on the story and trying to fulfill it outside
of you, begin to observe that energy. This again simply means
moving your attention away from the sexual fantasy into the energy
itself. It's energy. It's not good or bad, right or wrong. It's energy.
      I remember saying to an Indian teacher that I was having
problems with my second chakra, (which is normally described as
the sexual center in the body.) He said, "Only one chakra energy."
It's all energy, only the mind wants to compartmentalize it and label
it into chakras, higher and lower, etc.




    Practice

    Format that may be read by rotating group facilitator.

    Let your eyes close and get yourself comfortable again.
    I'd like you to begin to develop a sexualfantasy. You can
    start by picking someone that you'd like to be with.
    Notice what they look like, whether there are any
    sounds. Let yourself watch your sexual fantasy. Notice
    if there are any smells or tastes, any sensations. Let the
    fantasy run for a moment.

    Now move your attention from the movie of your sexual
    fantasy to the energy itself. Begin by noticing where in
    your body you feel that energy, where those sensations
    and those feelings are. Keep your attention on the
    energy itself. Where do you feel it, how do you feel it?
    Does it have a color or a shape or a sound? Keep your
    attention on the energy itself. If your attention goes
    toward the story, bring it back again, and watch the
    energy.
                                The Energy of Emotions - 77

Notice the size and shape of the energy. Be the energy
inside the shape. Now experience your skin boundary as
being made of the same substance of which the shape is
made. Experience the air around you, the chair, or any
states of mind that "pop-up" as energy. Notice that even
the "I" that's noticing and the E-motions are made of
energy.


Part 2: Quantum exercise with a sexualpart-
ner.
Step I:     Notice your present sexual experience.

Step II:    Notice part of your attention is on your
            sexual partner.

Step Ill:   As the energy peaks, turn your attention
            away from your sexual partner and notice
            where in your body you are experiencing
            sexual sensations.

Step IV:    Experience the size and shape of the sexual
            feelings,as you allow the sensations to build.

Step V:     Merge with and Be the sensations as energy.

Step VI:    Feel your skin boundaries as being made of
            the same energy as the sexual energy.

Step VII: Experience the air, the room, the floor, your
           chair, the rest of the universe including
           your thoughts as being made of the same
            energy.
78 - Quantum Consciousness
    Practice

    Now, when you are with a partner focus on the partner,
    on the sensations, etc. (as if you won't be doing that).
    Then as the energy begins to peak, see the size and shape
    of the energy, where it is in your body, i.e. mouth,
    genitals, breasts. Merge with the energy, and experi-
    ence your skin boundary as energy, the bed, the floor,
    the air, any thoughts, the room, and the rest of the
    universe. When you begin to plateau, just enjoy the
    experience. The process can then be repeated again,
    having"regular"sexual contact until an energetic charge
    is built up.

    Then repeat the steps; focusing on the energy, its size
    and shape, merging with it, and experiencing as energy
    the skin, the air, etc.



     Recently, I had a client who complained of pre-mature ejacu-
lation. He had fixated his entire at-(tension) on the tip of his penis.
I suggested to him, and with the patience of his loving partner, that
he begin to watch the sensations in his penis as energy. This
afforded him greater and greater ability to have the energy and
pleasure for himself, not to mention his partner. As he became more
proficient in this way of working with himself, he began to be able
to choose when to ejaculate, and allow it to occurat a higher plateau
of consciousness.
     In the early 1970S, a woman client in Los Angeles complained
that she could have multiple orgasms, but she did not feel satisfied.
Once again I suggested that she "build-up"energy, and then turn her
attention around and see the sexual energy as just energy. She also
practiced with her partner, building up more and more charge until
in her words, "I felt like I was going to burst." She would then
climax at a different level of consciousness. I am not suggesting to
eliminate orgasm, but rather to orgasm at a higher plateau of
consciousness. This deepens the orgasm, as well as increases the
overall feeling of connection to the partner as well as the world.
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 79