Therefore, allow the de-labeled energy to have it's own outward
motion, without your interrupting it with a judgement ("I shouldn't
have it"), evaluation ("It is bad"), or significance ("What does this
mean about me?").
    By allowing the natural, outward motion of energy to occur, the
energy passes right through you. In essence, you can get out of the
way and allow the energy to do what it does.
   In the late 60's and early 70's,theheyday of thehuman potential
movement, neurosis,(self-defeating behavior) could best be summed
up as being caused by an interruption in the outward motion. To
illustrate, a child feels energy passing through it and begins to make
noise. Mom or dad says, "Don't be angry." Here is an external
interruption in the outward motion of energy. The parents have
labeled this sound as yelling, anger, bad. This child learns to label
this energetic outward motion as anger and bad and begins to
interrupt his/her own outward motion. In many human potential
movement therapies, i.e., Gestalt, psychodrama, Mo-energetics,
etc., the therapy is based on completing or finishing the "unfinished
business," by "not interrupting" and "going with" the feelings
through expressing. Here, we are taking the labels with all their
meanings off of the E-motion, seeing it as energy and allowing the
energy to do what it does. This is feeling the emotions, which is -
subtly different than expressing feelings. This allows the interrup-
tion to be re-solved.
     Years ago I was taking a class in Feldenkrais Awareness
through Movement from Carl Ginsburg, a Feldenkrais trainer. He
said,"Leam to touch people without intention." I said"Carl that's
not possible. If I touch someone, just by the act of touching there is
an intention." He said, "It's a koan" (Zen question that is pondered
and designed to bring one to a particular state of consciousness). I
spent time with this and came to understand what Carl Ginsburg was
saying. I applied this to Quantum Psychology: you watch the E-
                                       The Energy of Emotions - 61
motions as energy just to watch and notice what happens, without
their being an intention or a goal in mind of it changing or getting
rid of it. You see emotions as energy. Just to do it—without any

    When doing the exercises, watch and notice what occurs as you
witness E-motions as made of energy.
    As you watch the E-motion, begin to feel it as energy. See the
emotion as energy moving in your system. If the emotion has
unpleasant associations, the energy has a tendency to get stronger
and stronger because it was more repressed. Gradually the energy
starts moving on its own. It might take five or ten minutes, maybe
five days or five seconds. There's no rush and no goal, only de-
labeling, and watching the emotions as energy.
     As an example, when you are working with yourself on some
deep emotional experience, seeing it as energy becomes something
you can practice. You might do it in your spare time. Just stay with
it and eventually something will happen.
     Years ago, while living in Santa Cruz, I received a phone call
that was very upsetting. I had never experienced an anxiety attack,
although, as a psychotherapist, I had helped people with that
problem many times. After the phone call, my body turned cold, my
heart was pounding, and I was frozen and in terror. I truly did not
know what it was. Kristi, being a good partner, said,"You're having
an anxiety attack." Needless to say, I fought it, resisted it, covered
myself with blankets. It was horrible. To make it even worse, I went
and saw the movie Casualties of War. I guess I was a glutton for
punishment.
    Later on I thought to myself, "I can hardly wait for my next
anxiety attack." Why? Because there was so much energy in it to
use. Sure enough about two weeks later, BANG, heart palpitations,
dry mouth, body frozen in terror. This time, however, keeping a
certain "observing presence," I realized what was happening. I lay
down on the floor, and focused my attention on my body, the fear,
the sensations as energy. My attitude was "take me wherever."
After a short period of time, I felt my heart open. I was vulnerable,
very connected to myself and I experienced a beautiful state. This
is the potential of this kind of practice.
     All these exercises are designed to transform your habitual
awareness from focusing on the story of why, to focusing on the E-
62 - Quantum Consciousness
motion itself, as made of energy, whether the emotion is pleasant or
unpleasant. The underlying assumption we are using is the concept
that everything is energy. Your E-motions are energy—the chair is
energy, everything is energy in different shapes and forms.
     One workshop participant in North Carolina reported that as he
turned his attention away from the story and onto the feeling itself,
the energy moved down his legs and out his feet. "What was
interesting,"he said,"was that I couldn't have planned that, or even
thought of that as a possibility."l said,"That's' right, you watch the
E-motions as energy with no intention, just with interest and
curiosity. Notice what happens."
     One workshop participant said,"This feels hard and like work."
I replied, "It is a practice—you're changing a habitual pattern of
focusing on the story of why you feel what you feel, to the feelings
themselves. You're changing a habit." We have all been trained to
focus on the story or reason why we are feeling what we are feeling.
As you practice, you will begin to focus quite naturally on the
energy itself. It is comparable to learning a sport. At first you might
feel very awkward, but after a while you can play the sport without
thinking about it. It stans happening in and of itself. When you get
into a swimming pool, you don't have to think about swimming, you
swim. You don't have to think about holding your breath when you
go under water, you do it. As you practice, this becomes quite
natural.


             Quantum Exercise 10

    Working with sadness.

    In this exercise, working with the label and experience
    of sadness as energy is explored. We'll begin to remem-
    ber some past situation in which you experienced some
    sadness. Next, move your attention from the story of
    why you're sad, or why you're feeling E-motional, to the
    energy of sadness itself.
                                 The Energy of Emotions - 63
Step I:     Recall a story or memory about when you
            felt sadness.

Step II:    Allow the sadness to manifest.

Step Ill:   Notice where in your body the sadness is
            occurring.

Step IV:    Take your attention off the story as to why
            you feel sadness.

Step V:     Put your attention and focus on the sadness
            itself, de-labeling it and seeing it as energy.
            If any thoughts, impressions, or the story
            comes up—see it as energy.

Step VI:    If you are working in a group, make eye
            contact with different group members, see-
            ing the energy within them as being made of
            the same energy as the energy within your-
            self.

 The rotating group leader may consider the following
format.

Practice

Sit for about ten minutes. Start by feeling your body,
how it's placed. Watch your breath rising and falling.
Begin to allow a remembrance to come into your aware-
ness pertaining to sadness. What people are involved in
the story? Where are you in the story? Notice if there
are sounds and emotions.

For a few minutes begin to allow that E-motion to
become stronger and stronger. Notice the feelings asso-
ciated with the story. Gently, move your awareness
from the story, the reasons or people in your story,
64 - Quantum Consciousness

    toward the E-motion,itself. See where the feeling is in
    your body. Notice its size, color, and whether it has a
    sound. Focus all your attention on the E-motion rather
    than the story. Witness the E-motion as energy.



     A workshop participant asked me,"This seems very contrived,
so how do l apply this in everyday situations?"I said,"In the context
of the workshop, it is often contrived because you may or may not
be able to bring up sadness." The idea is to practice, so that while
living your daily life and things come up, you can observe and use
the energy as fuel, to reconnect you back to yourself. In this way
every experience becomes the fuel or energy and an opportunity to
connect by seeing and experiencing the E-motion as energy, rather
than the ordinary experience of separation and disconnection when
we resist and label the E-motion."


               Quantum Exercise 11

    Working with anger.

    Step I:      Recall a story or memory when you felt
                 angry.

    Step II:     Allow the energy to manifest.

    Step ITT:    Notice where in your body the anger is
                 occurring.

    Step IV:     Notice the size and shape of the anger.

    Step V:      Take your attention away from the story as
                 to why you are angry.