Space becomes our commonality of experience but probably
the least acknowledged, because our tendency is to merge with the
picture, experience, and lose sight of the space that supports it.
Space serves the important function of allowing us to place experi-
ences, pictures, in our internal, cognitive reality. As demonstrated
before in various quantum exercises, space is the constant factor;
what emerges and disappears within the space is transient and can
become a trance. As we begin to allow the spatial quality of our
experiences, or part-(icles) floating in the ocean of space, we can
begin to see that all part-(icles) or images come and go, and move
within the context of space.
    For example, by observing stars in the galaxy, you could
imagine they can be part-(icles) floating in space. In our inner
realities, we can watch our own stars or part-(icles) (thoughts)
floating by—the thought forms that we occasionally grab and say,
"This is Ine." This occurs as a particular thoughtform we allow
ourselves to be identified with. If awareness is added by expanding
the viewpoint to include space, then again we see the part-(icle),
thoughtform, floating in space. We can then choose how to experi-
ence that reality or allow it to disappear into space.


               Quantum Exercise 27

    Step I:      Let your eyes close and sit quietly for a
                 moment. Notice the space behind your eyes.

    Step II:     Next, as you observe, notice something may
                 emerge in that space. It might be a thought,
                 wish, fantasy, that grabs your attention,
                 such as a relationship that is troubling you,
                 a new job that is hoped for, what to eat for
                 lunch, or a memory of a loved person.
                                            Getting to Zero - 119
    Step Ill:    Very gently notice the shape of these memo-
                 ries (part-(icles)); notice the edge and form
                 that goes with each one.

    Step IV:     Extend your consciousness out to include
                 the space surrounding the shape.

    Step V:      Notice it can be viewed as a part-(icle) float-
                 ing in space.

    Step VI:     Intentionally create the picture there sev-
                 eral times. See how the observer impacts
                 the experience.



     This picture can be created in the space repeatedly. This helps
the observer to "take charge" or take responsibility for holding,
putting, and keeping the memory (picture) there. This has to be done
without blame or shame. We are only asking the observer to
knowingly, consciously, intentionally create what he/she already
has created unconsciously. The picture appears to just happen to
come into his/her experience. But instead, the picture is placed
there. To move outside of an automatic reality, choice can be used
to create it intentionally. Now again notice the space around it,
which allows the creation. This allows more inner space.
     In the above material we have been exploring the constructs in
our psyche that we have placed there and continue to manifest as a
solid and mass-like part-(icle). The space in consciousness that
allows for more choice can be attained or facilitated by the follow-
ing exercise. This quantum exercise has evolved from many areas
and from many teachers. Many of these steps we have already
introduced and illuminated in the above material.
120 - Quantum Consciousness



             Quantum Exercise 28
   This exercise demonstrates an aspect of Einstein's Spe-
   cial Theory of Relativity: Energy is made of the same
   substance as mass. "When Einstein presented his spe-
   cial theory of relativity to the world in 1905, the entire
   concept of mass was transformed. With his famous
                    2
   equation E=mc Einstein demonstrated that mass (m)
   is a form of energy (E); a particle such as an electron can
   be viewed as a lump of concentrated energy."
   (Davies,1992)

   Step I:      Observe there is something in your aware-
                ness that you don't want, i.e., a thought,
                feeling, emotion.

   Step II:     Notice the size, shape or dimension of the
                thought or feeling.

   Step Ill:    Notice its mass or solid nature like a par-
                ticle.

   Step IV:     Intentionally merge with and become the
                part-(icle) within the shape.

   Step V:      Step-out of the shape and notice that you
                are the observer.

   Step VI:     Observe the shape as energy.

   Step VII: Realize that the shape is a part-(icle) made
              of energy.

   Step VIII: Observe what occurs when the part-(icle) is
               seen as energy.
   0 0 0 0 0 0 00 00 000000000 0000 00 0 00 000
                                            Getting to Zero - 121
     Below is a summary chart of where East, Middle East, and West
intersectto form Quantum Psychology. The reader is encouraged to
appreciate the roots of the tree of Quantum Psychology. The roots
are old; the tree is a synthesis that allows all traditions to be
appreciated for their contribution.
    The zero point process and the appreciation that the observer is
a participant in creating the reality he/she observes takes us to a
greater sense of freedom. To move us even further along, however,
we must realize that time becomes the next aspect to explore.
122 - Quantum Consciousness
123 - Quantum Consciousness
Six

                  The Concept of
                                                     Time
Time organizes our life, from getting up in the morning to when
we eat and when we sleep. Time regulates our emotional stress
levels such as feeling the "time crunch," or planning so that some
time in the future we can retire or relax. More often than not, time
determines our thinking and feeling states. Rumination about the
past and what could have or should have been can cause depression;
a looking back at the past time. Fantasies about future catastrophes
or future dreams coming true can cause feelings of anxiety or
elation. This illusive nature of Time, rarely questioned, and yet
assumed as truth, organizes and determines how we live, think, and
feel about ourselves.
    As we take apart the fabric of quantum consciousness, it
becomes important to look back at the threads in hindsight, so we
can get a sense of where we were and where we are headed.




                                125
126 - Quantum Consciousness


     Level 1:       Developing the ability to be the observer of
                  the wave-like nature of reality.

     Level 2:     The world, both subjective and objective as
                  made of energy.

     Level 3:      You, as the observer and creator of experi-
                  ences, label undifferentiated energy, to
                  create part-(icles) or mass, which function
                  as identities, false selves, emotional states,
                  and beliefs.




                             Level 4
           You are the observer/creator of the time aspect of
                            consciousness.



           Quantum Contemplation
     Contemplate a universe where there is no concept of time.


      Could a problem state exist if there were no time in which it
 could exist? Time, and the illusion of past, present, and future, traps
 us all in the web of limited existence. Volumes of books have been
 written about time, its nature. Even a Nobel Prize was awarded to
 Stephen Hawking and William Penrose for their"discovery" of the
 origin of time. Time also has become the subject of controversy in
 the holographic model of the brain, where past, present, and future
 happen not in a linear, left brain understanding of past, present, and
 future, but rather happen in the now, beyond time. For now, it will
 be sufficient to offer Quantum Psychology's very brief history of
 time, and more important, some exercises to experience oneself
 apart from the confines and limits of the concept and constraints of
 time. In Chapter VIII even deeper and more concise exercises will
 be conjoined to get you beyond time.
                                      The Concept of Time - 127

           Quantum Psychology
            and the Hologram
"A hologram is a three-dimensional photograph manufac-
tured with the aid of a laser. To make a hologram, scientists
first shine a laser bean on an object and then bounce a
second laser beam off the reflected light of the first.
Interestingly, it is the pattern of interference created by the
two lasers that is recorded on a piece of film to create a
hologram. To the naked eye, the image recorded on such a
piece of film is a meaningless swirl. However, if another
laser beam is shown through the developed film, the image
reappears in all of its original and three-dimensional glory

In addition to being three-dimensional, the image recorded
in a hologram differs from a conventional photograph in
 another very important way. If you cut a normal photo-
 graph in half, each section will contain only half of the
 image that was contained in the original photograph. This
 is because each tiny section of the photograph, like each dot
                                                                   \
 on a color television, contains only a single bit of informa-
 tion about the entire image. However, if you cut a hologram
 in half and then shine alaser though one of the sections, you
 will find that each half still contains the entire image of the
original hologram. Each tiny section of the hologram
contains not only its own bit of information, but every other
bit of informationPom the rest ofthe image as well. Thus,
you can cut a hologram up into pieces and each individual
piece will still contain a blurrier but complete version of the
entire picture. In other words, in a hologram, every part of
the image inter-penetrates every other part in the same way
that Bohm's non-local universe would interpenetrate all of
its parts.