To begin our journey it is important to trace back the unwanted
feelings to determine their origin and what emotions are composed
of. Later in the chapter, Quantum exercises will be presented that
can be done individually, in pairs, or in a group, so this awareness
becomes more experiential and less intellectual.
   What does Emotion mean? E means outward. Therefore E-
motion means outward motion. When we look at an unwanted
emotion such as anger, we notice that when you remove the labelof
anger from this experience you are probably feeling just a move-
ment of energy passing through your physical body. What has
happened is that this energy which would normally just pass
through your body, is labeled anger, with probably a "bad," or "I
shouldn't feel" definition attached to it. The problem arises when
the labeling takes place. Once you, as the observer, label this energy
in any way, you put a boundary around it, you contract it, because
you consider it bad, unwanted and resist it. This labeling process
keeps the experience contracted, bounded, and creates an air of
resistance, as opposed to seeing it as energy, which is the basic
substance of this E-motion.In psychotherapy, often a client is asked
to reframe a problem, feeling, or emotion into a solution.
     For example, a client that feels anxious might be given sugges-
tions by the therapist to see the anxiety as a motivator, or an internal
barometer that is letting him/her know that something needs to get
done. This refraining technique adds a new label called "motivator"
over the original label called "anger". Hence, the feeling is seen
differently, but generally you feel neither closer to yourself nor
more connected to others. The process of seeing everything as made
                                      The Energy of Emotions - 53
of energy is actually a process of de-labeling or de-framing, taking
off all labels and seeing emotions as energy—their most basic
substance.
    In the last chapter, we explored the wave-like function of
thoughts or feelings. In this chapter we will explore David Bohm's
energy function, "the universe is an unfolding and enfolding of
energy, space, mass and time." In the chapters to follow, we will
look at the space, mass, and time aspects. Each aspect of conscious-
ness can be seen as a rite of passage, because as we let go of, or
become less ridged in, one aspect of consciousness, it frees us to go
onto the next.
     But now, first things first. While teaching a seminar in 1983, a
participant asked me how Icame to this philosophy. In 1976, I was
26 years old and had been inspired to move to India and live in a
monastery to continue my inner search. Unfortunately for me, the
place I chose to live was a celibate community. Being 26 with full
hormones functioning, I was like a poster I saw of a yogi, sitting in
meditation, and above the yogis' head was a cartoon bubble fantasy
of having sex with a woman. It was like Mark Twain's old saying,
"Marriage has many pains, but celibacy has no pleasures." Being a
horny celibate, I very soon realized that repression, repetition of
mantra, working physically or taking on a sex-is-bad belief system
not only didn't help, but aggravated the situation. It was like being
asked not to think of a monkey. Of course, when you are asked not
to think of something, you have to keep the monkey there, in order
to know what not to think about.
     One day, however, I experienced a sexual fantasy. I realized
that since nobody was there in my room, then all these pleasant
feelings were coming from inside me. I turned my attention away
from the fantasy, and focused on the sensations themselves as
energy. A profound happening occurred—l went into a deep sense
of peace, comfort and bliss. This was awesome because in the past
if I had a fantasy, I would go chase after the fantasy outside myself
by thinking that it could give me these pleasant sensations or
feelings. To realize that they came from inside of me and that the
sensations were mine, and to be able to see them as, energy,
transformed my entire experience. Later, I found a passage from an
ancient text, the Vijnanabhairava:
54 - Quantum Consciousness
    "Since the sexual pleasure is obtained simply by memory
    even in the absence of a woman, it is evident that the delight
    is inherent within. It is the delight apart from any woman
    (man) that one should meditate on." (Singh, !979:67)

     Several days later, it was about 5:30 a.m. and I was chanting
Sanskrit mantras in a temple. It was mid-May in India and it was
hot!! Ibegan to feel angry, and my mind began to throw-up (no pun
intended) pictures as to why I felt angry, i.e. "it's hot I'm tired"
Suddenly I put down my chanting book, and again turned my
attention toward the anger itself. I saw the anger as made of energy.
Quite suddenly there was a shift. The anger was transmuted. Ibegan
to pulsate with bliss. Looking back at this in 1983,I"realized" what
Einstein had said,'"that everything is emptiness and form is con-
densed emptiness." I was experiencing that pulsation or movement
as the anger in its solid, palatable form, shifted back to energy and
into the void. The form of anger (which was energy) moved back
into the void (no energy).
     I later found an ancient sanskrit text called the Spanda Karikas.
"Spanda" means the divine pulsation and "karikas" translates as
lessons, hence, Lessons in the Divine Pulsation. Paraphrased, it
said, if at the moment of extreme anger, extreme sadness, or extreme
joy, or if you are running for your life, if at that moment you could
become introverted, you would experience spanda (the divine
pulsation). What I did was to become introverted by taking my
attention away from the object of my emotions, the story or reasons
why, and focused on the feelings in my body as energy, and I
experienced this pulsation David Bohm says that the world is an
unfolding and enfolding of energy, space, mass, and time. The
pulsation was the unfolding and enfolding process that I was
experiencing, as my emotions moved from manifest to unmanifest,
manifest to unmanifest, in a rhythmic fashion.

     ... so our reality is made up of a constant, rapid, back and
    forth shutting between our solid reality and the way-out
    reality which we share with everybody else. An expanded
    or higher state of consciousness implies an expansion of
    our psyche into space. So it can be said thatin the oscillating
    movement of a pendulum, what you get is an oscillation of
                                        The Energy of Emotions - 55
    manifest/unmanifest, manifest/unmanifest, manifestl
    unmanifest, manifest/unmanifest, and what you're getting
    from that is nothing/something, nothing/something, noth-
    ing/something, nothing/something. And that can be defined
    in classic meditation as the space between two thoughts or
    the space between two breaths (Bentov, 1977:76).

    Here Bentov is suggesting, that as we "observe," there is an
oscillation, that can be likened to the movement of a pendulum. If
you imagine the movement of a pendulum, the pendulum stops at
one point, (space) and moves in the other direction and stops. This
stopping point is the same as the space between two thoughts
mentioned in the last chapter or one of the most widely used
meditation techniques...the space between two breaths. In my
emotional example, the pulsation I experienced occurred by de-
labeling the E-motion as energy and allowing it (since no resistance
was there), to move through me in a manifest/unmanifest way.



               Quantum Exercise 8

    Focus on the space between two breaths.

    This exercise is probably the most widely-used medita-
    tion technique I know. Although for many it may be
    "old hat," I review it here.

    In this exercise, you are to just watch your breath.
    Watch your breath rise as you inhale. There will be a
    space before the inhale turns into an exhale, then you
    will exhale and there will be a space before your exhale
    turns into an inhale: inhale ... space ... exhale ... space ...
    inhale ... space ... exhale ... space. It will be the same
    space each time.
56 - Quantum Consciousness

            Transmutation or
       Transformation of E-motions
    Transmutation can be defined as a change in condition or an
alteration, as in qualities or states of mind. In this case, moving from
the dualawareness to the quantum awareness. Noted Sufi teachers,
G. I. Gurdjieff and P. D. Ouspensky suggested this work might be
called "Psycho-transformism."