I worked very diligently for the next year-and-a-half to under-
stand and experience how my reality was observer-created. One day
I was sitting, watching my observer-created realities appear and
disappear, watching the observer come and go out of my awareness,
when I realized that I was also beyond the observer and my
observer-created reality. The observer in me, it seemed, arose with
each new creation, as though the two, observer and its creation (i.e.,
thought or feeling) were instantaneously related. And since "I"
could witness not only my thoughts, but myself witnessing my
thoughts,I realized that something must extend beyond the confines
of the observer-creation dyad. Gradually I began to feel no longer
bound by the continual comings and goings of the observer who was
creating, becoming, experiencing, and finally, observing, each new
"reality." There was a "me-beyond-observer-created-realities" that
existed in what I called a "no-state state" that felt open, empty, and
freeing. It was a state I could easily re-enter by pulling my attention
away from the thoughts and focusing on myself, the one behind the
thoughts. Often, in meditation, one tries to actively create this state
through the repeated use of a mantra, visualization, or other tech-
nique. In what I later called Quantum Consciousness, I found that,
once experienced, all I had to do was shift my attention to re-enter,
and open a space in which this could occur.
     My next leap in understanding came when I experienced the
observer and that which it created (my thoughts, feelings, sensa-
tions, beliefs, etc.) as being the same at a fundamental level. On a
superficial level, I had perceived these as different and had given
them different names or labels. For example, I had some sensations
moving in my body. I labeled these sensations "fear" and decided
that that (fear) was not good and something I did not want. Hence,
I began to resist this energy that "I" had labeled as fear. What "I"
realized was that "I" had labeled this energy fear and 'I" decided I
didn't want it. When I stopped deciding l didn't want the fear, and
took off the label and saw it as simply energy, there was no longer
a problem. The fear was at its most fundamental level made of
                                             Arousing the Giant - 7
energy—hardly something I needed to resist. (More about this in
chapter 4.)
     Actually, this corresponded greatly to noted physicist David
Bohni's idea that there is an "explicate order" and "implicate
order." The explicate order is the world as we typically perceive it:
full of objects with apparent differences and boundaries. The
implicate order is the unbroken wholeness that connects us all; it is
the quantum level where objects, and particles, and people, and
emotions are made, sub-atomically, of the same substance. On the
explicate level, the observer and that which is observed (thoughts,
emotions, sensations) appear to be different. On the implicate level,
however, they are one and the same. When I was absorbed in this
implicate state of interconnection, the line of demarcation between
the observed/creator and the observed/created disappeared and I
was left in a quiet wholeness.
    To explain further, the explicate level is where my thoughts
appear to be different from the chair, my arm appears different than
your arm. On an implicate level however, there is an underlying
unity or quantum level where everything connects with everything
else.
    Now when I had an experience of sadness, I realized that the
observer of the sadness and the sadness itself were fundamentally
the same; it was only my perspective of it at an explicate level that
split the experience into one of contrast or I-Thou-ness. At the
quantum, subatomic level, the composition of what we experience
as space and what we experience as physical matter is identical
there is no difference between space (emptiness) and physical
matter. In Einstein's words, "Everything is emptiness and form is
condensed emptiness." (More about this in Chapter 7.) Sub-atomi-
cally, there is no difference between the chair, the sofa, my arm, my
pen, my hair follicles,the refrigerator, and the air or empty space in
between it all. If you were to look through a "subatomic lens" the
world at its most basic level would look like particles floating in
emptiness—a pain-free state (or no-state state) from which "my"
personal problems would appear and disappear.
    One day while contemplating all this, I began to "look for" the
being or person or self who had been doing all the meditating,all the
witnessing, all the creating, the "me-beyond-observer-created re-
alities" who had experienced the observer and the creator as the
8 - Quantum Consciousness
same. The more "I" looked for who was experiencing this feeling
or that thought, who was practicing meditation, the more I saw that
there was no one there, just empty space. "I" found nothing. That
which was doing all those things, and all those things which were
being done or created, and the consciousness of "I"—were all the
same. There was no separate, individual "I," because "I" cannot
exist as a separate entity unless the "I" is fundamentally different
from or separate from everything else.
    At first, I wasn't able to remain in this "no-state state" for long;
I would re-enter the observer-created state as soon as I turned my
awareness outward and would resume creating, fusing with, and
becoming the experience of my thoughts and feelings. However, the
implicate level of unbroken wholeness that I had visited became
increasingly easier to re-enter. I would drop into it in times of stress
and fatigue as well as when things were going fine. Although I
would pop out of it as often as I popped into it, the unity conscious-
ness became an ever-present knowingness or presence that brought
a tremendous comfort and peace to whatever endeavor I was
engaged in.
   The point of having an experience of Quantum Consciousness
is to open the doorway into a larger reality that provides a larger
context in which to "hold" our experience. Instead of experiencing
pain, isolation, frustration, or separateness as absolute states unto
themselves, one gains a residing sense of the larger whole, of how,
in physicist David Bohm's terminology, "everything is connected
to everything else." While the sense of being connected to, even
indivisible from, tile rest of creation tends to come and go—one
does not experience Quantum Consciousness 24 hours a day—the
periodic experience of it loosens the hold of previous, limited
patterns of thinking and believing. Even a single shift into Quantum
Consciousness can change the way you relate to chronic patterns in
a lasting way.
     Here the Eastern tradition precedes our new Western quantum
view of things. Ancient yoga texts call this state in which there is no
"I,"samadhi; Zen Buddhist texts, satori. It is also suggested in these
writings that as samadhi is experienced more often, the knots or
patterns of the mind loosen and have less power.
     Why would I want to experience that Iand tile chair and the sofa
and the rest of the universe are the same at the subatomic level?
                                              Arousing the Giant - 9
What will that do for me when I get up in the morning, drink my
coffee, and head off to the freeway?
    My answer is based primarily on my personal experience. I find
that life becomes very even. Any experience of Quantum Con-
niousness, even when it is not vivid in one's awareness 24 hours a
day. begins to take away the judgment, the evaluation, the pain of
separation that typically contaminate daily experience. Instead of
believing absolutely in the boundaries and appearances of separa-
tion, competition, pain, and conflict, another window of
consciousness is opened upon an experience of a larger unity.
   Quantum Consciousness is essentially unity consciousness
certainly not a new concept in the history of humankind. Eastern
traditions (and even some Western philosophies and religions) have
been telling us for a very long time that there is an underlying unity
that connects us all. The individual could move toward the experi-
ence of underlying unity along any number of pathways. In the past,
however, you had to take on a belief system in order to follow a
particular pathway. In the ancient, traditional pathways, one first
had to take on the role of Eric Hoffer's True Believer and become
a devotee of the master who taught"it"—it being enlightenment (or
belief in one particular system) and the pathway (or "how to") of
achieving it.
    What is different about the quantum approach to unity con-
sciousness is the role of science as the herald of it. The role of
science in our past shaped a far more limited, one-dimensional
universe. The central principle of Newtonian physics, which re-
duced the world to simple units of cause yielding a predictable
effect, is at the core of contemporary psychology and even Eastern
pathways. One set of events in childhood is seen as the cause of
certain behaviors in adulthood. A particular technique of medita-
tion is supposed to yield certain,even predictable and"guaranteed,"
results.
     How often had I personally experienced this see-saw of prom-
ised cause/effect formulas, only to be disappointed. Countless times
I had been promised that doing "X"(be it spiritual or psychological)
could absolutely bring an end to my discomfort. Diligently I would
practice the given remedy (be it meditation, or deep-tissue body-
work, or acting out the different parts of myself, etc.), only to remain
in pain.
10 - Quantum Consciousness
   The discoveries of quantum physics turned Newton's ordered
world upside down. In 1976 when I came across Fritjof Capra's
book, The Tao of Physics, I read with fascination about a new
principle afoot named "non-locality," called by noted physicist
Henry Stapp, "the most profound discovery of science." (Stapp,
1977:191)In Einstein's Moon physicist F. David Peat described the
work of physicist John Stewart Bell, whose theorem (appropriately
called "Bell's Theorem") states that there are "no local causes" in
the universe. The explanation of Bell's "proof" is complicated, but
in essence, it states that the linear cause-effect relationship of
Newtonian physics does not exist.
    Shock waves rippled through the scientific community in 1964
when Bell first published his findings, and the shock waves con-
tinue to this day. The giant called Science,long lulled by the refrain
of Newtonian physics, was finally aroused. Turning its die-hard
linear gaze (cause/effect) in a non-linear (non-local) direction, it
was shaken through and through. The principles of Sir Isaac
Newton, which have served as the very foundation of Science (as
well as psychology), have rumbled and splintered apart, only to
reveal a whole new foundation of interrelationships that leaves
some scientists in horror and others in awe. The giant's world is not
as we have believed—and what we thought was reality is turning
out to be a fairy tale.
     Most psychological and spiritual systems require faith and
belief. The quantum approach, which arises from a perception of the
relativity of beliefs, asks one to recognize its validity from subjec-
tive experience only. If it does not resonate with you, if it doesn't
work for you, forget it. It doesn't mean you aren't ready, aren't pure
enough, aren't surrendered enough, aren't evolved enough. It
simply means it isn't for you. For sure, it is not for everybody.
    In the next chapter we will explore Quantum Consciousness
through a series of levels that are the stepping stones of Quantum
Psychology. With each level the reader is asked to experiment with
exercises that pave the inner way through the increasingly bound-
less journey of Quantum Psychology.
Two