When we magnify our physical matter very much, we find
    that we are made mostly of void, permeated by oscillating
    fields. This is what objective physical reality is composed
    of (Bentov, 1977).



                 Parallel Universes
    Probably, one of the most amazing theories in quantum physics,
is what Nick Herbert in his book Quantum Reality calls,

    "Quantum Reality # 4: the many worlds interpretation
    (reality consists of a steadily increasing number of parallel
    universes.)" Of all the claims, "says Herbert, none is more
    outrageous than the contention that myriads of universes
    are created upon occasion of each measurement act."
    (Herbert, 1985:19).
    What does this mean in light of what we have been discussing
throughout the book.
    Let us begin by reviewing our earlier premises.
    In Chapter V, we saw that you as an observer created your
subjective experience through the vehicle of belief and labels. In
Chapters VI, VII, and VIII, we got to appreciate that the world is
David Bohms' unfolding and enfolding of energy, space, mass, and
time. As we move through our journey the components of energy,
space, mass, and time are viewed as made of the same substance, or
condensations in the Quantum field, or emptiness.
    In Chapter V, we understood that we create that which we
172 - Quantum Consciousness
observe. But in Chapter VIII the space that surrounds the part-(icle)
or what I call the I-dentity, since it is what you call "I", are seen as
the same. This causes the part-(icle) to go back to the same
substance emptiness. Why? Well, as we explained earlier, you
could only have an experience if there were a contrast, or one part-
(icle), like, "I love myself," viewed as separate from another
part-(icle), "I hate myself," and both as being separate from the
space that surrounds them. If there were no contrast (this is different
from that), there would be no separation, hence, no experience.

Principle: All experiences require an explicate view of separation
and contrasts. As soon as the contrasts are seen as local condensa-
tions in the quantum field, (created reality), the structure or distinction
between energy, space, mass, and time de-constructs, goes back to
its deconstructed substance, emptiness.

Simply put, we can say that part-(icles), beliefs, or I-dentities are
constructed or condensed emptiness; and that emptiness is de-
constructed or thinned-out part-(icles), beliefs or Identities.
    How does this apply to the parallel universe theory that all
universes exist side by side? To answer this, let us look at some
major and minor approaches to self-help and enlightenment in both
psychology and Eastern traditions.


                          Psychology
     In psychology, the brilliant work of Carl Jung, M.D. demon-
strated a belief structure, part-(icle) floating in emptiness, or local
condensation of the quantum field. The Gestalt therapy of Fritz
Perls, M.D., as wellas the psychotherapy and hypnotic approach of
Milton H. Erickson, M.D., were both local condensations in the
quantum field. In other words, boundaried belief systems, which are
condensed emptiness.
   Each of the above mentioned theorists have helped countless
people in their search to handle psychic pain. Each system, how-
ever, is a belief structure, and, hence, has boundaries and is
composed of energy, space, mass, and time. What is meant by this
can be seen in illustration #11.
    Each one of these universes was a created structure. For
                                           The Living Void - 173

                      Illustration 11
Below are three different models of psychotherapy. Each model has
energy, occupies space, has mass, and exists in time. Notice,
however, that the emptiness that surrounds the bubble and the
bubble are made of the same substance. Stated another way, the
bubble is made of a condensed emptiness, or a local condensation
in the Quantum field.
174 - Quantum Consciousness
example, when I was a client in Gestalt therapy in the early 70'S,
Gestalt, by its disciples was viewed as the way, the truth, and the
light. It was a beautiful belief structure that believed that resolving
unfinished business from the past would alleviate present-time
emotional pain. In many cases it worked to help people handle
emotional pain. In the part-(icle) bubble of Erickson, the same is
true, a belief structure that held that problems could be solved
through reassociation, reframing, resource retrieval, etc. Once
again, a powerful universe or part-(icle) bubble to enter.
    The extraordinary cosmology of Jung had a part-(icle) bubble
that helped people understand themselves in a new context to
include their relationship to the universe, archtypes, etc.
    Each one of these pioneers, and many, many others, have
developed systems and structures that have helped countless people
over the last so many years. I am not in any way "putting down,"
these systems. They are local condensations in the Quantum field.


                  Religious Systems
     Let us now look at the Eastern and Middle Eastern philosophies
of yoga, Buddhism, the Sufi tradition, and even, dare I say it,
Christianity.
     Since countless volumes have been written on each of these
traditions, let me say for now that each tradition holds certain belief
structures. Each structure, because it has never been questioned or
seen as a belief, but rather is seen as the ultimate reality, can cause
the practitioner to remain stuck in a separate boundaried part-(icle),
a bubble like structure. To illustrate this imagine your bathtub filled
with water (emptiness), and bubbles (condensed or constructed
emptiness). Each bubble could be seen to represent a belief system
and parallel universe (condensed emptiness). Within each parallel
bubble-universe is contained a belief system, a boundary which is
surrounded by the water in the tub (emptiness).
     Therefore, each universe exists side by side, surrounded by the
same substance or emptiness and made of the same quantum field.
Hence, the parallel universe theory.
    "Not only do space and time form a unity called spacetime,
    but matter is also connected to it. It's like a gigantic sponge
                                             The Living Void - 175
    cake. The bubbles of spacetime enclosed in the cake are
    meaningless without the spongy cake surrounding them.
    You can't have spacetime without matter, one defines the
    other, and vice versa." (Wolf, 1988:109)
    This means, that since everything is made of the same quantum
field (emptiness), then all universes exist side by side. Also, this
validates Nick Herbert's Quantum Reality #8: "The world consists
of potentials and actualities." (Herbert, 1985:26).
     Here we see no contradiction between the parallel universe
theory, (universes exist side by side), the world as potentials and
actualities, and Nick Herbert's Quantum Reality #7: Consciousness
Creates Reality. How can these apparent contradictory notions be
reconciled. Again, if everything comes from and is made of the
same quantum emptiness, then all universes exist and are paradoxi-
cally in potential. Furthermore, what is consciousness? Condensed
emptiness. Therefore, consciousness creates reality. (This will be
discussed more fully in Chapter XI).
    Suffice it to say, for now, as soon as an undifferentiated
consciousness (emptiness) is defined and labeled a part-(icle) or
belief system (bubble) emerges (condensed emptiness). And, as
soon as the part-(icle) is seen as being made of the same substance
as all other part-(icles), conflicts cease. Why? Because no construc-
tion orimagined separation, no imagined conflicts. This can be seen
in illustration #12.
      Now, what do all these systems have in common?
      First, they are all created.
      Second, they are all beliefs.
    Third, they all have energy, have solidness or mass, exist in
    time, and occupy a space.
    Fourth, each structure is made of the same basic substance:
    undifferentiated consciousness, which is the quantum field.
    Now, how can we put this in the light of quantum physics in
general, and parallel universe theory in particular.
    Parallel universe theory was invented by Hugh Everett in 1957
at Princeton University.
    "Despite its bizarre conclusion, that innumerable parallel
    universes each as real as its own actually exist, Everett's,
176 - Quantum Consciousness

                       Illustration 12
Below the black is the emptiness or the Quantum field. The bubbles
are local condensations in the Quantum field, which we call a
"spiritual path."
                                             The Living Void - 177
    many-worlds picture has gained considerable support among
    quantum theorists." (Herbert, 1985:19)

    Four questions emerge regarding this theory. First of all, how
can we suggest that all universes do exist. Two, how can this apply
to psychological theory. Three, how much does this help us in our
own struggle to resolve conflicts. And four, where does this leave
us as we journey through Quantum Psychology in our discovery of
who we are.
    Let us begin with the first assumption in parallel universe
theory, namely that all universes exist side by side.
    To do this let us take a moment to experience an exercise.


               Quantum Exercise 52

    Step I:     Letyour eyes close and notice the emptiness
                in front of you.

    Step II:    Take some emptiness and condense it down
                and create a psychological system, like Ge-
                stalt, Jungian, Ericksonian, transactional
                analysis, Psychosynthesis, Freudian Analy-
                sis, etc.

    Step Ill:   Take some more emptiness and condense it
                down and create another psychological sys-
                tem.

   Step IV:     Condense down some more emptiness and
                create another psychological system.