1. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "is there anything you could do to be more
        perfect?"

    2. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "do you have qualities?"

    3. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "is there anyway to make you better?"

    4. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "has this always been there?"
                                            The Last Voyage - 225
    5. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "would this be affected if you remembered it
        or not?"

    6. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "is there anything you could add to this to
        make yourself better, purer, healed, or closer to
        God?"

    7. On present evidence without using your memory or
        mind, "does this need to be refrained, healed or
        changed in any way?"



      The Quantum Consciousness
                           Process
    The Quantum Consciousness process is the highlight of this
approach. These two processes, when understood and experienced,
leave the practitioner in the no-state state of the non-being being.
Therefore, not only is nothing occurring; there is neither being nor
a non-being. Try it and notice what occurs.



    Part 1
    To be done with a rotating facilitator reading the follow-
    ing."

    Step I:      Close your eyes and notice that you are the
                 background of your experience.

    Step II:    Allow the emptiness to condense into form
                and become an experience.

    Step Ill:    Pretend you don't know the form is con-
                 densed emptiness.
226 - Quantum Consciousness

   Step IV:    Be aware that the form is condensed back-
               ground or emptiness.

   Step V:     Turn your attention around and see if you
               can find what, if anything, is doing this.




   Part II
    This format is suggested for use by a rotating group
   facilitator.

   (eyes closed.)

   Step I:     Be the background of your experience.

   Step II:    Allow the background to be emptiness and
               the foreground, you're looking into, to be
               thinned-out emptiness.

   Step Ill:   Pretend you don't know the background is
               emptiness, and the emptiness in the fore-
               ground is thinned-out form.

   Step IV:    Allow the emptiness of the background and
               the emptiness of the foreground and you to
               all be seen as emptiness.

   Step V:     Turn your attention around and notice what,
               if anything, is doing all of this.
                                         The Last Voyage - 227


   Part III
   To be read out loud by rotating groupfacilitator.

   Step I:     Experience yourself as the background of
               an experience and the experience as fore-
               ground.

   Step II:    Notice the observer of the experience.

   Step Ill:   Notice that you are the background of the
               observer.

   Step IV:    Notice that the observer and the experience
               it observes is foreground.

   Step V:     Condense the background making it into
               the experience in the foreground.

   Step VI:    Thin-out the observer making it back-
               ground.

   Step VII: Make the experience the background.

   Step VIII: Make any you that is being experienced in
               the foreground intothebackground by thin-
               ning it out.

   Step IX:    By turning your attention around, notice
               there is no "you doing this exercise!



    Here we see the find level of Quantum Psychology", Quantum
Consciousness. Modern psychology is interested in the fore-
ground, Quantum Psychology is interested in the background,
and the understanding that foreground is background and back-
ground is foreground.More importantly, background, foreground,
228 - Quantum Consciousness
and the observer of both are one and the same, which means no
background or foreground. And, as for the "you"you call your-
self, well whether it beperceived as background or foreground, it
doesn't matter since they are the same. This means that the
concept of a sejf or no-self does not leave us with an absence,
rather it leaves us with a presence of pure isness.

    "no one has influenced more of our notions of what the
    Quantum world is more than Danish physicist Neils Bohr,
    and it is Bohr who put forth one of Quantum Physics most
    outrageous claims: there is no deep reality. Far from being
    a crank or minority position, 'There is no deep reality'
    represents the prevailing doctrine of established physics."
    (Herbert, 1985:16)


     This means everything is the same substance—hence, there is
no deep reality nor is there not deep reality—everything just is.
     Quantum consciousness is not quantum consciousness at all; it
could only be called so if someone were thcrc to pcrccive it.
     So now with no quantum consciousness in the absence of an
observer, what are we left with? With ourselves, or as David Bohm
calls it, "unbroken wholeness." Bohm insists, "There is no quantum
world." So too, Quantum Psychology suggests that with pure isness
there is no "where" to be left, no one to be left, nowhere to go.
     From pure isness, Bell's Theorem of no local causes and, in
essence, no location, never arises, because there is no separate self
to bring up the concept of "this causing that" or"this being separate
from that"—therefore, there is no such thing as distance from one
object or person to another.


             Quantum Exercise 76

    "If one perceives the cosmos as mere jugglery conjured
    up by some juggler or magician, or sees the world as a
    painting...then they will experience great happiness."
    (Singh, 1979:92)
                                            The Last Voyage - 229
    Practice

    The following format may be used by the rotating group
    facilitator.

    Close your eyes for a few minutes and think about or
    imagine that the world is just like juggling, like some-
    thing produced by a juggler in the circus, and that
    everything is being constantly juggled very spontane-
    ously, almost like a magician's trick and that, somehow,
    everyone and everything landed this way. Let your
    mind expand to imagine that the world is like juggling,
    a magician's trick. Somehow, it all landed here, and
    everybody somehow lands where they do.

    Contemplate the freedom, if the world is just a magi-
    cian's trick.

    Now open your eyes and look around the room and see
    if you can imagine that everything has been juggled
    somehow like a magician's trick, and lands where it
    does randomly.




         Quantum Contemplations
    Contemplate there is no one who is in charge of the
    universe.

    Contemplate the emptiness is in charge.


    With no separate individual self to perceive it, there could not
be a cause, an effect, a locality, or something or someone in charge
of what happens. Here, Bohm's unbroken wholeness is experi-
enced: no causes and since no causes, no effects. Stated another
way; The cause is the effect.
230 - Quantum Consciousness

    World famous philosopher and political activist Mahatma
Gandhi understood this. Gandhi's policy of non-violence was used
by Martin Luther King in the 1960S. Mahatma Gandhi emphasized
that people felt that the end justifies the means. Gandhi understood
that the means and the end were the same. This is why he used
passive resistance and non-violence to get the English to leave India
in the 1940s.
     There never has been nor will there be an individual experience
of quantum consciousness or enlightenment. Since that could only
exist if there were a separate you to declare that it existed. No you
no individual enlightenment.
    "There is no Quantum World," warned Bohr, "there is only
    an abstract quantum description." (Herbert, 1985:22)
Eleven

                      Consciousness
    This is the end, beautiful friend, the end. This is the end, my
    only friend, the end. ..picture what will be so limitless and
    free...
                                                   Jim Morrison