This can be done until the person opposite you begins to see
thoughts as part-(icles) or bubbles floating in emptiness. Each part-
(icle) bubble carries with it the experience, with beliefs, ideas,
storyline, and evidence to validate what it is experiencing. This, as
was referred to in my earlier book, Trances People Live: Healing'
Approaches in Quantum Psychology. is a trance, because you have
to become a tiny part-(icle) and shrink yourself down to a part-(icle),
or point of view. This is what in psychotherapy would be called a
"false self", sub-personality, a part, an I-dentity, or an ego state. The
                                Gong Beyond Ordinary Reality - 193
observer, too, is a trance. Why? Since you can be aware of the
observer, and you can be aware of being aware, then you are more
than the observer. If, however, you shrink yourself down and
become an observer, you will create something to observe, because
that is the function of the observer: to participate in the creation of
that which is observed.
   For example, take a belief or an experience called, "I like
myself," or an experience called, "I don't like myself," and notice
the shape of that particular belief. All beliefs, part-(icles) or bubbles
have shapes to them, as mentioned in Chapter V. If you notice the
shape, then you notice that inside the experience, or part-(icle)
called, "I don't like myself," are all the situations, all the experi-
ences, all the history that this statement, this belief has asserted. It's
a tautology, which means it is self-organizing in that if you believe,
"I don't like myself," then that will constantly be reinforced. This
is a closed loop. The observer creates, "I don't like myself." This
creates a history, with thoughts, feelings, emotions, etc. to validate
its creation. In essence, the observer/creator organizes the empty
space so that empty space becomes condensed and appears as a
reality and true. The observer fuses with the condensed emptiness
as a reality, and it becomes a closed loop (in psychological terms).
In other words, everything the observer creates, reinforces every-
thing else. To illustrate, if the observer organizes the empty space
and creates,"I don't like myself," this created reality acts as a filter
and interprets interaction through thisfilter. This, becomes a closed
circuit:




     In this illustration, the closed intrapsychic loop of observer
creating, "Nobody likes me," cannot allow in any other informa-
tion. It can interpret the information, "I like you," as "It is not so,"
or by just not allowing it inside the system.
194 - Quantum Consciousness

               Quantum Psychology
                and the New Age
    The question often arises in workshops about beliefs creating
external events. I have had New Agers who believe they create
external events happening to them because of the beliefs they hold
to be true. Quantum Psychology is very different than New Age
Schools, which imagine that because I have a particular belief,
 "Nobody likes me," that I will therefore attract people to me who
don't like me to re-enforce my, "Nobody likes me." Quantum
Psychology states that the belief part-(icle) "Nobody likes me," acts
as a filter and only creates that experience subjectively, whether it
is there or not. Example: if, when I look at you, I believe you don't
love me i will experience "You don't love me!" This does not mean
you don't love me. It means, subjectively, I will only experience my
belief and thus experience "You don't love me!" This is the self-
organizing aspect of a part-(icle) orl-dentity.The I-dentity part-(icle)
keeps itself mass-like and solid by continually perceiving reality as
re-enforcing its beliefs. This is only subjective. I do not create "not
loving me" in you. I only create my subjective experience of "You
don't love me!" Hence, I create my own subjective reality!
      In cognitive therapy this is called "mind reading." Simply put,
if I believe nobody likes me, I project that you don't like me, and
then I act as if this mind reading were the truth. Often times, people
as children develop this "cognitive distortion" as a way to handle
their parental situation. Mind-reading Mommy's or Daddy's wants
could certainly help a child to please them and survive. The child
learned that mind reading and pleasing an alcoholic or abusive
parent might be a way to "keep the peace." Unfortunately, as the
child becomes an adult he takes this mind reading with him on
automatic. The adult, with this mechanism running, will mind read,
unknowingly, the present-time situation, as if it were the threaten-
ing past.
   Many clients have told me that, "Nobody likes me" or "My
husband/wife doesn't love me." They feel that way even if friends
like them or their partners act and verbally interact with love. Why?
Because the observer, once they create "Nobody loves me," will
filter out all else and even make "Nobody Loves me" their subjec-
                              Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 195

tive reality, as mentioned in Chapter V. Once a part-(icle) I-dentity
becomes that defined and solidified, no information contrary to its
belief structure can get in!!!
    This is very different than New Age thinkers who believe that
we bring to ourselves "external" conditions to re-enforce our belief
structure. We are saying in Quantum Psychology that the observer
sources its own internal subjective experience, not the internal
subjective experience of another. Let me give an example from the
first chapter of Trances People Live.

    "If I say, "I like you," you may create any number of
    responses: (1) That's nice; (2) He didn't really mean it;"(3)
    "If he only knew what I was reallyl ike he wouldn't feel that
    way; (4) I wonder what he wants from me. (WoIinsky,
    1991:3)