Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate that if there were no time, then there would be
    no time in which a problem could exist.
                                          The Concept of Time - 137
    How could this be applied to practical experience? If we are
experiencing a feeling and begin to observe it's appearance of
duration, the feeling willdissipate and disappear. This is because in
order for you to notice and witness the time-bound aspect of
experience, you would have to step out of the time aspect that is
intrinsic to any experience. Basically, in order to observe time, you
have to step outside and observe it. This allows an unwanted
thought, i.e., "What's wrong with me?" to run its course. By doing
this you are getting out of the way of the thought and allowing it to
occur without resisting it or trying to change it. This allows the
experience to have movement and be a verb, rather than a frozen
noun.The observer is outside oftime, since he/she can observe time.
The following exercise will help to make this more experiential.


                Quantum Exercise 31

    Noting the impact of time on created reality.

    Step I:       Notice a thought that goes by.

    Step II:      As you notice the thought label the begin-
                  ning of the thought "Beginning."

    Step Ill:    Label the intense part of the experience
                 "Middle."

    Step IV:      Label its ending "Ending."



    To do this exercise, a person need only notice any experience
they are having and then label, according to the experience, its
beginning, its middle, or its ending. What this serves to do is that in
order to notice the time aspect of an experience, you have to step out
of time, and get in the observation mode. This takes you out of the
time constraints, out of being stuck. You can become separate from
time, i.e., observing, and secondly, once you notice where the
experience is, (beginning, middle and end), it takes you out of being
138 - Quantum Consciousness
in it and out of the time aspect. For example, when you are in an
experience like anxiety, it feels like "it will never end." By noticing,
however, its place in the time continuum you are put outside of the
effect of time. This frees you and frees the experience to not appear
time frozen. When you fuse with an experience, you feeltime. Why?
Because all experiences occur in time. Therefore, when you move
from being the observer of an experience (the observer of a time-
bound experience is not in time) to being an experience, you feel
like you are in time and frozen. Observing experiences moves you
into a no-time space, and allows for the movement of an experience.


                Quantum Exercise 32

    Step I:       Notice or recall an emotion.

    Step II:      As you notice the emotion label the begin-
                  ning of the emotion "Beginning."

     Step Ill:    Label the intense part of the emotional
                  experience "Middle."

     Step IV:     Label its ending "Ending."




                 Quantum Exercise 33

     Step I:      Notice a feeling that goes by and see the
                  thought or feeling as energy.

     Step II:     As you notice the feeling, label the begin-
                  ningof thethought"Beginning" while seeing
                  the thought or feeling as energy.
                                         The Concept of Time - 139

    Step Ill:    Label the intense part of the experience
                 "Middle" while seeing the thought or feel-
                 ing as energy.

    Step IV:     Label its ending "Ending" while seeing the
                 thought or feeling as energy.



                How Crucial is Time?
    In the psychotherapy of Milton H. Erickson, Erickson noticed
that the experience of pain was so awful because of this "time"
continuum. Dr. Erickson, being a master of pain control, noticed in
his clinical practice that the experience of physical pain has three
parts: past remembered pain, present pain, and fear of the pain
extending into the future. Erickson noted that if he got the patient to
let go of past remembered pain, and the fear of recurring future pain,
he could diminish the physical discomfort by two-thirds. In the
same way, in the time continuum, labeling any experience "begin-
ning", "middle", and "end", takes you out of the time continuum so
you can observe time and its fluid motion. This allows the experi-
ence to run its time-bound course. By not resisting and just allowing
its natural flow from beginning in time to disappearing out of time,
frees you from the identification with constraints and limitations of
time-bound reality. The greater subtlety of time and its illusive
effects will be demonstrated in Chapter IX.


                        Conclusion
  The purpose of this chapter is to loosen the concept of time. As
mentioned earlier, Bohm suggests that the world is an unfolding and
enfolding of energy, space, mass, and time. For our purposes,
nothing can exist within the physical universe if one of these
components is not there. Therefore, removing yourself from a time,
energy or mass experience, moves you away from any time-locked,
frozen limitations.
     As with all of this work, keeping open to possibility, permits us
to reconsider our constructed limitations.
Seven

                                                 Space

                                    The Final
                                         Frontier
Many of us can recall the beginning of Star Trek and certainly
the words of Captain Kirk,"Space: the Final Frontier."This section
will explore and introduce "Inner Space: the Final Frontier."
     In the last several chapters, we have experienced both the inner
and outer possibilities and meanings of energy, mass, time and
wave/particle aspects of the universe. We examined the world of
inner experience as composed of energy, mass, and time. This
section offers an introduction into one of the most interesting and
least talked about areas of consciousness, space. Why is space so
relevant and yet overlooked'?




                                 141
142 - Quantum Consciousness

                            Level 5
         Going beyond the space aspect of consciousness.


    Let's look at this in terms of Quantum Psychology principles.

Principle: In order for anything (thoughts, feelings, chairs, cars,
etc.) to exist in the physical universe, there must be a space to put
it in.

    At first this seems rather abstract, but upon closer investigation,
we can notice, for example, that our body has a space that it
occupies. If there were no space in which to put a body, the body
would have no place to exist, or be in.




          Quantum Contemplations
                            (eyes closed)

    Contemplate just for a moment a universe in which there
    were no space to put anything in.

    Contemplate where, if anywhere, an "internal" problem
    state (anger or upset, etc.) could exist if there were no space
    for it to exist in.

    Contemplate where, if anywhere, an "external" object
    (chair, floor, house, body, etc.) could exist if there were no
    space for it to exist in.

    Surprised? Nothing can exist in the physical universe
    without a space to put it in!!
                                     Space: The Final Frontier - 143
    What is space? If you close your eyes for just a moment, you can
see an empty space in front of you. Now, you can watch and see a
thought go by such as, "Yeah, so what if it's true, who cares?"
except that this thought could only exist if there were a place or
space for it to exist in. No space, no thought. Albert Einstein, in his
Special Theory of Relativity, demonstrated that space and matter
were the same. What will be experientially offered here are intro-
ductory exercises, so that this experience of space can become
readily available along with how to apply it and transform our
subjective experience of reality. As a note, it would be impossible
to offer all the processes of the Quantum Psychology" four-day
workshop on energy, space, mass, and time, in the limits of this
book. It is hoped that these exercises will emphasize the importance
of space as a major aspect of consciousness and hence the world,
both inner and outer, along with the implications and applications
as we include and acknowledge space.


                 Quantum Aerobics
              Quantum Exercise 34

    (Open eyed)
    Step i:       Look at an object in the room, then with-
                  draw your attention from it, prior to the
                  thought or impression of the object. (Singh,
                  1979:107)



    The next two exercises are open-eyed. The first one involves
practice with objects in the room. When you try this, you might want
to practice in a small group. This enables us to make eye contact
with a partner and then switch to another partner. This permits
contact to be made space to space rather than person to person.
Opening up this space-to-space connection deepens contact and
intimacy, because it removes created personal internal obstacles.
144 - Quantum Consciousness


    Practice

    Format rotating group facilitator may use:

    Pick an object in the room, like a chair. Begin to pull
    your attention backward, into the space prior to your
    knowledge of the object. In other words, your attention
    is normally experienced as going forward or outward
    toward a particular object, like the couch or person.
    Pull your attention back inside, or backward toward
    the back of your head. As you look at an object, pull
    your attention back to the space in back of your head,
    prior to the impression, idea, or thought of the object.