3
4 - Quantum Consciousness
that changed all the time as I went into different emotional states.
One moment I liked myself, the next I didn't. One day I was
contented with my life, the next day I was restless.
    After so many years of being a workshop junkie, I met an Indian
guru. He, I was told, not only knew who he was, but could somehow
transmit this knowingness to me, so that eventually I would reach
a state of liberation and freedom. Of course, no upstanding work-
shop junkie could turn down such an opportunity—particularly
since it only cost $50.
     Before long I was a devotee, still wondering when I would get
enlightened, when I would finally "find myself"' and know the
answer to my lifelong question "Who am I?"
     I spent almost six years in a monastery in India, chanting,
working, and meditating my way through clouds of emotional pain,
finding no answer.
     Then, through personal contact with Nisargadatta Maharaj,
another Indian Teacher, I began to discover who or what I was not:
I was not my mind...I was not my thoughts...I was not my
emotions.. .I was not anything that was knowable. I was the witness
of all these things that came and went but which were not me. I later
learned that this approach of discovering who you are by first
experiencing who you are not was a path unto itself. A practical
analogy for it might be: peeling away the layers of an onion. What
most of us didn't realize when we began such a process was that
after all the layers of the "onion" were peeled away—nothing
remained. More on that later.
    For the next five years, back in the States, I meditated three to
five hours daily and resumed my investigations of Western
psychotherapeutic methods. Ericksonian hypnosis and family
therapy became added ingredients in my internal synthesis. By late
1985 I realized I was falling into a chronic state of depression. Not
only had I not discovered who I was, but I began to perceive all
models of psychotherapy, yoga, and spiritual disciplines as just
that—models. They were belief systems—pictures, stories, rendi-
tions of the truth—but not the truth. If they had contained the truth,
I would certainly not be depressed because, after all, "I believed"
that "the truth" frees one of all pain.
     I re-entered psychotherapy and bodywork as a client again on
almost a daily basis. There were periods of time in which I was
                                              Arousing The Giant - 5
receiving seven hours of bodywork and several hours of "regular"
therapy each week, in addition to my heavy meditation practice. I
left no stone unturned, but still felt no inner resolution.
   I was a student of Buddhism and Buddha had said that the self
does not exist. But I had said,"Sure, right, the self does not exist, but
now "I" have to meditate, "I" have to process these feelings, "I"
have to work on myself..."I" have to surrender..."l" have to stop
resisting"...and on and on.
    After meditating several hours a day for many years,I could get
into a peaceful space, a quiet void, but after I stopped meditating, the
effect would last, if I was lucky, only a couple of hours. Then my
mind would come back and I would start feeling uncomfortable,
irritable, angry, or whatever, run back to my meditation, and
witness the same stuff all over again.
    In 1986 I realized that my Eastern teachings were overlooking
a major aspect of the observer or witness: the witness not only
witnesses and is mindful of what passes through the mind and body,
but it is also the creative source of it.
     In other words, the witness or observer of the mind (thoughts,
feeling, emotions and associations), not only witnesses thoughts or
emotions, but somehow instantaneously creates that which it wit-
nesses. What I mean by this is that a thought called "I don't like
myself" appears "as if" it had always been there and had a life of its
own. In reality, however, in a mysterious way the observer creates
the thought, through the act of observation; observation was the
creative vehicle of the observer. Stated more simply, in order for the
observer to have a job called observing, it must create something to
observe.
    It was at this point that Heisenberg's Uncertainty Principle
(more about this later) became something I could experience, not
just think about. In essence, it states that all reality is observer-
created. Now I actually experienced that I was first creating the
thoughts that I then observed or witnessed while meditating. My re-
discovery of Heisenberg's work on an experiential level reopened
the field of quantum physics to me and led me further into develop-
ing the system of Quantum Psychology. I began rereading all the
books l could lay my hands on. The implications of quantum
physics swirled around the Eastern teachings in my mind as I began
to sense how each system was pointed toward a common "truth" of
6 - Quantum Consciousness
the underlying unity of everything. I also began to understand how
quantum physics could be integrated with Western psychology to
"speed up" the resolution of problems both I and my clients were
experiencing.