The Stepping
                                     Stones of
                                     Quantum
                     Consciousness
Quantum physics has produced a stunning sub-atomic mosaic
that daemonstrates the underlying unity of the universe—not to the
naked eye, perhaps, but within the physical realm. Which means
that we have things considerably easier than our predecessors when
it comes to probing the "nature of reality." Many challenges still
remain,however. It is not easy to bridge the formidable gap between
the invisible, sub-atomic level of particles and waves floating in



                                11
12 - Quantum Consciousness
emptiness and the practical, very visible nature of our daily lives.
But it is possible.
    In attempting to bridge the gap for myself, I began to view the
process in terms of "levels of consciousness". Each "level" actually
denotes particular understandings and experiences that one might
go through in order to "move on" to the next level. This can be
likened to "rights of passage," in which with each new experiential
understanding of an aspect of consciousness, one becomes freer to
move to the next aspect of consciousness, or level of understanding.
These passages I call"quantum jumps" through which one passes.
As one passes through one aspect of consciousness, new doorways
are opened, new experiences explored, and one can move on
through the next aspect of consciousness. My tally was seven levels,
but there is nothing absolute about the number. It simply reflects the
stages or levels I have experienced.
   These levels are the "map" of Quantum Consciousness. To
quote noted philosopher Alfred Korzybski in Science and Sanity,
however, "The map is not the territory." The point is not to create
another map or model to which a group of people adhere, but to
provide simple exercises that stimulate new experience in practitio-
ners in such a way that the window through which they view their
reality can begin to shift. Each step is comprised of a concept that
reflects a specific level of Quantum understanding and a series of
exercises though which the concept can be experienced on all
levels—mentally, sensorially, emotionally, physically, and spiritu-
ally.
      Before dipping into the essential characteristics of each level,
it is important to appreciate the core principles that differentiate
Quantum Psychology from modem psychotherapy ,which is based
on what we could call "Newtonian psychology."
    Psychotherapy is based on the principles of Newtonian physics,
as mentioned in the previous chapter. The gist of these principles is
visually captured in the billiard ball metaphor in which the structure
and movement of each billiard ball can be clearly defined and
predicted. When billiard ball A is struck, it will move toward pocket
A. This is a very orderly world. Isaac Newton, certainly a genius and
innovator of his time, described a reductionist view of the world:
everything could be reduced down to small units, acting and
reacting upon one another, in a cause-and-effect measurable, pre-
dictable pattern.
              The Stepping Stones of Quantum Consciousness - 13
    When these principles are translated into psychotherapeutic
assumptions, each person is viewed as a separate entity unto itself,
who is clearly disconnected from every other person, object, struc-
ture, or form, and who goes through the day experiencing a linear
series of stimulus-response, cause-and-effect relationships. Unity
consciousness is not discussed. Indeed, in some schools of psycho-
therapy, there is no consciousness whatsoever—rather, human
functioning is viewed as a complex string of stimulus-response
pathways. When consciousness is admitted as an operative concept,
it is seen as something to be altered, reframed, cured, changed,
heightened, or healed. Consciousness is taught to solve problems in
itself by identifying cause-and-effect relationships that explain and
then hopefully change the problematic dynamic. For example, a
client who comes to therapy complaining about his poor relation-
ship with women is suggesting that some relationship with a
women, probably his mother, has caused the problem.
    By contrast, in the quantum approach to consciousness we are
interested in providing experiential pathways by which you can
begin to perceive and relate to a quantum universe—a universe in
which the "facts" of observer-created realities and the inherent
interconnectedness of all things are recognized and experienced.
While most forms of therapy focus on helping the client to become
a "whole" person, Quantum Psychology expands this context of
whole personhood to include the rest of the universe. By leading you
through a series of levels that slowly unravels the previous limited
world view of separation and linear, cause-and-effect relationships,
you eventually no longer experience yourself as "separate from" or
"a victim of..."
    Many schools of psychotherapy focus on integrating "parts" of
an individual. For example, let's say that a part of you as a child
pretended that things were okay and behaved in a certain way so that
your mother would love you. Another part, however, was really
angry and always tried to prove Mother was wrong. Conventional
psychotherapeutic approaches would encourage the angry child
within to express itself, and the pleasing child to give up trying to
please Mom. Or the two parts might be "reframed" as survival and
growth mechanisms containing resources that can be used in adult
life. Perhaps your drive to prove your mother wrong somehow led
you to develop successful business skills later on. Still other
 14 - Quantum Consciousness
therapies would contend that if the psycho-emotional state is
"owned" as part of the person, then the problem (whatever it is)
would be resolved. Most forms of psychotherapy involve some
attempt to create a"new" belief over the old problematic one, pre-
supposing and judging that it is better to have a "good" program,
belief, or decision rather than a "bad" program, belief, or decision.
    Quantum approaches to psychotherapy create levels of under-
standing that lead one to experience interconnection as the context
rather than conflicting parts. In the above example, the adult would
learn to observe reactions called "Pleasing Child" and "Angry
Child" as observer-created realities that were created in response to
particular experiences with the mother. Ultimately, the goal is to
experience the common underlying interconnectedness throughout
all responses. Once the larger context is experienced, the specific
responses begin to lose their definition and their significance.
     It is for these reasons that the quantum approach does not
emphasize integrating the false selves of early childhood; it is not
concerned with refraining trauma into resource; and it does not
reprogram beliefs. Above all, Quantum Psychology is interested in
the you that is there beyond all the parts, all the traumas, all the false
selves. Indeed, the pure experience of Quantum Consciousness is
not about integrating anything; it is about recognizing and experi-
encing the underlying unity—the underlying absence or
interconnection of all parts, so to speak. This underlying experience
of unity is where the true wholeness can be experienced and actually
is the context for everything. More importantly, this is the context
that already is. It is a matter of recognition of that which is, namely,
the common unity that we all share. This is the space where
problems disappear and you emerge. Stated another way, you
become the never-changing background and problems, be they
psychological or emotional, are seen as an everchanging fore-
ground. In a nutshell modem psychology is interested in the
foreground, Quantum Psychology is interested in the background.
This does not mean a denial of foreground, but ultimately a unity of
foreground and background. (More about this in chapters 9 and 10.)
   Modem psychotherapy emphasizes a whole or authentic self.
When the quantum perspective is added, the therapeutic goal is
extended beyond integration of the singular self to include a
relationship with the larger cosmos. Modem psychotherapy has its
              The Stepping Stones of Quantum Consciousness - 15
roots in problem-resolution, whereas Quantum approaches identify
problems as caused by the sense of separation and provide experi-
ences of underlying interconnection.
    Now let's dip our toes briefly into the seven different levels
before examining their origins and implications in succeeding
chapters. Each level represents a"quantum jump" in understanding.
Quantum jump is a specific term in physics that refers to the nature
of change that occurs in particles:


    In place of a continuous change is a discontinuous leap. At
    one instance the elementary particle is inside the nucleus.
    At the next it has escaped. There is no intermediate state, no
    time in which the particle is actually in the process of
    getting out. Unlike a mouse, a quantum particle will never
    be discovered with its head poking out and its tail sticking
    in. Quantum theorists call this discontinuous transition, the
    quantum jump. (Peat, 1990:15)

    An instant before the jump, the elementary particle is
    occupying a given Tegion of space. An instant later it is
    somewhere else and according to the quantum theory no
    physical process connects these two physical states of
    being, no duration of time separates them. It is as if the
    elementary particle suddenly flickered out of existence,
    passed through a limbo of no time and no space and then
    reappeared somewhere else. At one instant the particle is
    inside the nucleus and the next it is travelling around at a
    high speed. Nothing happens in between. This is the mys-
    tery of the quantum jump. (Peat, 1990:19)