Before you can do anything about how you feel, you have to be
able to observe or witness it. The moment you attempt to see what's
going on inside of you, part of you separates off to make this
observation. In philosophical terms, it's called "self-reflection"; in
psychosynthesis terms, it's called "disidentification."G.I. Gurdjieff
called it "self-observation," the Hindus and Buddhists called it
"witnessing" and the Zen Buddhists, "mindfulness". In the last 25
years it has not been uncommon in psychotherapy circles, like
Gestalt, to ask a client to "be aware" of a pattern. In Hakomi therapy
recently developed by Ron Kurtz, mindfulness is emphasized.
Certainly, whether we called it awareness, mindfulness, observa-
tion, or witnessing, disciplines of the East, West, and Middle East
have employed it in some way to help the individual enhance
personal freedom.
    Whatever the name, the essence is observation. Thus the
purpose of this first quantum level is to teach you how to observe
g'our internal experience rather than jitsing with it and being
consumed by it.
   This observation gives you an experience of looking at your life
e vents without judgment, evaluation, significance or preference.
For most of us, judgments, likes, and dislikes pop up automatically,
so that we "find ourselves" disliking a person, or we "find our-
selves"loathing a particular event. Ratherthan consciously choosing
a response, reactions happen to us, often beyond our control. These
automatic reactions greatly color and shape how we perceive and
experience the world around us, and as long as the reactions remain
on "automatic," we remain unable to choose how we feel, how we
live.
        The moment you use part of your awareness to observe a
reaction, in essence you are putting a distance between you and the
26 - Quantum Consciousness
response. In that space, you are not consumed by the reaction. Even
as the reaction runs its course, the space of observation creates a
distance that diminishes your sense of attachment to it.
    Because Quantum Consciousness is an experience more than it
is a concept, it is useful to create an environment in which to
experience this response/reaction phenomenon. In this spirit, Quan-
tum exercises and contemplations (which can be practiced alone, in
pairs, or in small groups) accompany each quantum Level.


              Quantum Exercise 1

    Sit comfortably and let your eyes close gently. Inten-
    tionally recall an incident that upset you. It might or
    might not involve other people. It could be the toilet
    overflowing while you're home alone, or it could in-
    volve an angry, nonverbal exchange with a motorist, a
    misunderstanding with a clerk, or a clash with a loved
    one.

    Visualize the incident, seeing yourself in the middle of
    it.Be in the middle of it, recreating the scene with all the
    turmoil and annoyance with which you originally expe-
    rienced it.

    Next, continue to see the very same scene, but also notice
    that you are watching it. Now there is a you in the scene,
    experiencing all the emotions and upset, and there is a
    you outside the scene, in the experience of observation,
    noticing all the emotions, thoughts, and sensations.

    Notice if there is any difference between how you expe-
    rience the two visualizations.



    You might not experience the feeling of objectivity and no
preference in the beginning. Most of us are very attached to our
responses to things. If we feel we have been insulted, misunder-
                                    Getting Out of the Thick of Things - 27
stood, or belittled, we are not usually willing to step outside our
righteous emotions too quickly. If you find yourself unable to move
to the second visualization, stay with the first part, being in the
middle of it, until some of the charge of the event is drained off.
Eventually, you will begin to feel willing to let part of your
awareness move into the neutrality of observation.
   You can also imagine yourself inside an empty theater with a
large screen, on which you project your visualization of the upset-
ting experience. The you sitting in the theaterchair observes the you
in the middle of the experience. As you watch your own "movie,"
ideally you become less fused with the story. If the story remains
upsetting—for example, you are picturing yourself as a "bad"
mother losing your temper with your child—then intentionally
allow yourself to feel the "bad mother" feelings. Do this intensely
for a minute, then release the visualization, relax for a few minutes,
and then create it again. Each and every human being is drawn back
to experience those events, feelings, and traumas that were resisted
initially. Most of us resist feeling bad, in general. Sometimes, the
need to experience something is so great, that it is not possible to
move to the observation mode without first allowing yourself to be
submerged in whatever has been resisted.
      However, the moment you intentionally allow yourself to
experience a resisted emotion or event, no matter how submerged
you may feel in it, the very fact that you consciously chose to
experience it creates the pathway to the freeing, neutral space of
observation.* As you shift in and out of submerging yourself in the
experience and then observing yourself inthe experience, you begin
to actually sense the you that is present forboth levels. As you recall
the emotional experience, realize that prior to it you were there and
that after its affects had fully spent themselves you were still there.
The You, or observer of your experience, is always there; it notices
all the thoughts, sensations, and feelings that come and go.
      I had one client who described the difference between being
completely submerged in the experience versus having part of
herself in the observation space as "having more room to breathe:"

* Although this is not the time to delve deeply into anoiher realm of physics called "chaos
theory," it is important to note that what most of us resist more than anything in our lives is
chaos. You can give chaos other names—feeling overwhelmed, anxiety, confusion, being
out of control, feeling crazy—but its essence is resisted experience. This resisted experience
causes the formation of chronic identity patterns. The relationship between chaos theory and
resisted experience is discussed in detail in my forthcoming book, The Tao of Chaos:
Quantum Consciousness Vol. 2.
28 - Quantum Consciousness
    "When I'm all wrapped up in the experience, there is a
    feeling of contraction and narrowness—kind of like I'm
    trapped in long corridors with no windows and no doors.
    Once I move part of myself into observation, there's more
    room to move—the corridors widen immediately, and I get
    a feeling of space, of air, even of light coming in."