Here the observer is sourcing his/her internal, subjective re-
sponses to a particular person saying "I like you." Many New Age
thinkers might say, "Why did I create that person to say,I like you,"
or"What lessons am I suppose to learn from them,"etc. This is what
we call super-source. Super-source is imagining that you are
sourcing (creating) someone else's experience. This, of course, is
an "age-regressed" position that comes from childhood. In psycho-
logical terms it would be called "infantile grandiosity," whereby the
child believes it makes mother or father feel good orbad, or that hel
she is responsible for Mom or Dad's experience. As a possible
scenario,the baby is lying in its crib and feels cold. Mom comes and
puts a blanket on. She/he wants to get picked up. Dad comes and
picks the child up. She/he is hungry. Somebody comes to feed her/
him. The baby decides something like, "Through my thoughts or
feelings I can bring people to me to give me what I need. I create
Mom/Dad coming." This, of course, is easily re-enforced by Mom/
Dad saying, "You made me feel angry."
     This is the food for obsessive thinking. Let's imagine that the
child is hungry and several times the Mom/Dad doesn't awake to
feed the child immediately. The baby thinks, "Well since my
thoughts created them coming before, if I think harder, I can get
them to come and give me what I need. Maybe I should see
(visualize) them coming to me giving me what I want. This is called
primary process in psychoanalytic terminology and is so basic that
it overlays into many areas in our lives.
196 - Quantum Consciousness
     In this age-regressed grandiose state, which is a trance, people
feel they are responsible for what other people feel, think or do.
Although volumes have been written on co-dependence, suffice to
say for now, that the observer (you) sources his/her own subjective
experience, not someone else's reaction to you. Often in work-
shops, I'll say something like,"I have no idea how subjectively you
are creating me inside yourselves. I must say however, when I gave
up trying to control how other people created me in their subjective
experience, I felt much freer. Because I no longer spent my energy
trying to get people to see me a certain way, I was able to allow
people to have whatever experience they were having of me."
People have I-dentities which resist another's subjective creation.
For example, a women of 45 I was working with was still "taking
care" of mom who was needy and dependent. Iasked her, "Are you
willing to allow your mother to have her pain?" She said,"No."This
is where the therapy must go. Why is her age-regressed I-dentity
resisting her mothers' subjective creation of pain?
    Another client, an attorney, always felt people thought he
wasn't smart. The question and session dealt with his resistance to
the possibility (mind-reading) that others were creating him subjec-
tively as "not smart." He had a deep resistance to others' subjective
creation. To over compensate he tried hard to be smart; rather than
allowing other people to have their subjective experience of him.
     This grandiosity leads to blaming oneself forextemal events, or
trying to re-frame unpleasant external events into "lessons."
     Quantum Psychology is suggesting an inner focus, in which
you notice the observerand what he/she creates as made of the same
essential substance—no blame, no lessons, no reasons, no purpose,
no judgement, no evaluation or significance, no shame. Emptiness
results in organizing or condensing itself into form, form de-
condensing or ck-constructing itself into emptiness.


    The Psychology of Prior Created
         Part-(icle) Identities
    Often in psychotherapy a new decision is offered to the client
over the old decision. For example, if someone has decided, "Men
or women are trustworthy," many forms of therapy offer the re-
                                                                                               \\

                                        Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 197
decision "Sometimes men/women can be trusted," or "It is okay to
trust," or some facsimile thereof. This attempt to re-organize
experiences by re-organizing the"beliefs usually yields marginal
results.

Principle: Once an observer creates a belief, the first belief is the
strongest. Hence, creating a new belief over an earlier belief, causes
more conflict.

     It is hoped that this principle explains the partial failure of both
psychology's re-decision and the New Age thinker's "thought
affirmation." In both cases, the observer creates an "unwanted
belief," such as, "The world isn't safe," and attempts to change the
belief to, "The world is safe." Every time you write, affirm, or re-
decide 'The world is safe," you are re-enforcing its opposite. You
must keep the first decision there to know what you don't want.
     Let's take another example. A client comes in and complains in
some way about his/her inability to deal with authority. During the
session, he/she says, "I didn't want to be like Mom/Dad; I decided
to be the opposite." From a quantum perspective, this client must
keep "Mom/Dad" in consciousness in order to always know what
not to be. The first creation is an impression of "Mom/Dad,"and the
one created in opposition is, 'I won't be like them." Two things
occur. First, under stress, adults sound just like their mothers and
fathers (the first created impression). Secondly, if both realities are
to be held by the observer, the "Mom/Dad" can be projected on a
boss, a husband, wife, or the loan officer at the bank. Another
scenario might be that as a boss or authority figure a person will
become just like "Mom/Dad," filtering out other information and
perceiving the employee as a helpless child, the second created
impression.
     These, are examples of how an observer creates various bubbles
and experiences of life through these structures.*
     In, Quantum Exercise 55, we got clearer about the observer
created reality and the difference between the observer and the
observed. In Exercise 56, we are asking you to see that you are
beyond the observer and the observed, or you might say we ask that

*The topics of oppositional identities and the grandiose naiure of an age-regressed child is
discussed in detail in The Trances ofihe Inner Child: The Dark Side by Stephen WOlinsky.
Ph.D., Bramble Books, Publication date: Fall 1993.
198 - Quantum Consciousness
you be aware of being aware. Please DO NOT GO ON TO Quantum
Exercise 57 until it is very clearto you that you can be aware of the
observer and its creation. You might even want to spend a day, a
week or whatever time it takes to practice being aware of the
observer. This can be done by continually asking yourself the
questions in the previous exercises. "What is the difference between
me and the observer of feelings, thoughts, or emotions?" If it is not
experiencable stop and work with it until it is. This next Quantum
jump requires the clarity of the step before it.



               Quantum Exercise 57

    "Everything is made of emptiness and form is
     condensed emptiness." (Albert Einstein)

    Step I:      Notice an experience, belief, or I-dentity
                 that is troubling you, like, "I don't like
                 myself."

    Step II:     Notice the shape of the part-(icle) I-dentity;
                 this will put you outside of the part-(icle) I-
                 dentity.

    Step Ill:    Continue to move your awareness farther
                 out so that you notice that the part-(icle) I-
                 dentity called,"I don't like myself," is like a
                 bubble floating in emptiness.

    Step IV:     Allow the bubble that is floating in empti-
                 ness to be seen as condensed emptiness. In
                 other words, notice that the emptiness is
                 condensed down and made into that bubble
                 and that if it were thinned out, it would be
                 in emptiness.
                              Going Beyond Ordinary Reality - 199
    Step V:      Notice what happens when you recognize
                 this.



  The Observer is Made of the Same
     Substance as the Observed
    In order to experience a problem state, one must imagine and
pretend that there is a difference between the observer and that
experience the observer creates. For example, if an observer creates
the experience, "I like myself," the observer must pretend that it is
made of a different substance than the observed. If an observer does
not pretend that, and the substances are viewed as the same, then
there can be no contrasts, therefore no experience.
    Problems can only arise as long as there is an "I" separate from
the problem. Once the substance, i.e., observer and observed, is
seen as the same, the problem and the experiencer of the problem
merge and disappear.


             Quantum Exercise 58

   In quantum physics, the scientists are joined in a com-
   plex system with no distinct, well-defined parts, and the
   experimental apparatus does not have to be described
   as an isolated physical entity for the scientist to include
   it in the scientific experiment. Another way of saying it
   is that subject and object arejoined ... or the subject and
   object only exist as one. (Capra, 1976:121).

   Step I:      Notice when you are having an experience,
                i.e., "I love myself", anger, etc.).

   Step II:     Notice the observer of the experience.