One student told me, "It's sort of a sticky issue for me, because
I think I've never felt that anything came from cause or that I see
things connect the way most people see them. It has sometimes
made me feel as if I were crazy. To think that the way we function
is from cause and effect could be a grounding mechanism, but I've
never had that to ground myself with. It's never meant anything to
me. I'm scared that if nothing connects then my whole perception
of reality gets screwed, and then I feel really weird."
     Another student reported, "My experience was that there was
just no power in my thoughts or ideas or knowledge, just nothing
connected to them."l replied,"Most people give their power away
to thoughts, people, events or situations. By taking your power back
from people you feel more power—this is empowerment."
     In other words, if you have been in a relationship in which how
you felt about yourself was dependent upon how the other person
felt about you at that moment, ihey had the power. Your okayness
218 - Quantum Consciousness
was dependent upon them. In the same way, if you have a thought
called, "I want to go to Hawaii on a vacation" and give your power
to that, then that thought will have power over you. The next thing
you know you're working overtime to pay for your trip to Hawaii:
Who has the power? The thought of a trip to Hawaii has the power,
because you're reacting to it; but you can pull your energy from it,
and it will then have no power over you. You can choose to do it, or
choose to not do it.
     Here is an interesting issue brought up by a physicist in my
workshop: "I couldn't help but translate, 'This thought has no
cause,' into 'This thoughthas no source.' Then I said that I generate
not only thought but, as a scientist, I generate facts. To say that they
don't have a source is to say that I don't exist. I couldn't deal with
it." I suggested to him that he had fused together his own existence
with facts and thoughts.


     Quantum Exercises (Reviewed)
           Quantum Exercise 69
    The world as empty space and part-(icles).

    For a minute or two, look at your hand. Pull your
    attention backward into the emptiness prior to the
    information or idea of your hand. Without blinking,
    imagine that your hand is made of tiny particles floating
    in empty-space. Now allow your body to be experienced
    as part-(icles) floating in empty space. Look around the
    room at d ifferent objects; de-focus your eyes allowing
    yourself to see objects, the wall, a couch, etc. as made of
    part-(icles) floating in empty space. Notice how this
    experience is freeing and expansive. This simple exer-
    cise can be practiced anywhere.

    Einstein explains (as does the Buddhist Heart Sutra)
    that these part-(icles) are made of condensed emptiness,
                                            The Last Voyage - 219
    and that the emptiness is made of thinned out and
    liquefied particles. As you do the exercise, contemplate,
    "Who is doing this process?"




           Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate that l am condensed emptiness. Experience
    yourself as condensed emptiness.




               Quantum Exercise 70

    Step I:      See the emptiness in front of you.

    Step II:     Take some emptiness and condense it into
                 anything solid, e.g., thought, feeling, etc..

    Step Ill:     Thin it out into emptiness.

    Step IV:      Do this several times (condensing and thin-
                  ning).

    Step V:       Experience the "you"that is doing allthis as
                  condensed emptiness.



  Nothing Does Nothing to Nothing
    This probably is the most interesting part. The one who is doing
these exercises is made of the same condensed emptiness as the
thought, feeling, chair, or table.
220 - Quantum Consciousness



               Quantum Exercise 71
   Location

   Do this guided by a group facilitator.

   Step I:      Notice the emptiness in front of you.

   Step II:     Allow the emptiness to condense and be-
                come an experience.

   Step Ill:    Allow the emptiness to be an observer of the
                experience.

   Step IV:     Allow the observer (emptiness) to create the
                concept of location.

   Step V:      Pretend the concept is true.

   Step VI:     Pretend you are not pretending it is true.

   Step VII: See the observer, the experience, the con-
              cept of location, and the concept of cause
              and effect as the same substance, emptiness
              and condensed emptiness.

   Step VIII: Turn your attention around and see if you
               can find the one who did all of that.
                                      The Last Voyage - 221



           Quantum Exercise 72

Cause and effect.

A group facilitator guides the group as follows:

Step I:     Notice the emptiness in front of you.

Step II:    Allow the emptiness to condense and be-
            come an experience.

Step Ill:   Allow and designate part of the emptiness
            as an observer of the experience.

Step IV     Condense emptiness down creating the con-
            cept of location.

Step V:     Condense emptiness down creating the con-
            cept of cause and effect.

Step VI:    Pretend these concepts are true.

Step VII: Pretend you are not pretending these con-
           cepts are true.

Step VIII: See the observer, the experience, the con-
            cept of location, and the concept of cause
            and effect as the same substance, emptiness
            and condensed emptiness.

Step IX:    Turn your attention around and see if you
            can find the one who did all of that.
222 - Quantum Consciousness
    Even the observer or witness is made of condensed emptiness,
which means that not only is everything the same,butthe "you",you
thought you were, is made of the same condensed emptiness as the
chair you are sitting on. This means that the chair you are sitting on
exists only as long as the condensed emptiness you call"you" exists
to see it.

    "There is no reality in the absence of observation."(Herbert,
    1985:17)


          Quantum Contemplation
    Contemplate for a moment that the observer the observed
    and the contemplator are all made of condensed emptiness.


   Actually the whole phenomenological universe and you are
made of condensed emptiness, i.e. the same "quantum stuff." You
only exist as the seer apart from the seen as an apparent condensed
emptiness, pretending you are not a condensed emptiness. There-
fore, you the observer and the experience are allthe same condensed
emptiness. Stated another way, experiences only exist as long as
you don't know who you are. Once you know you and the experi-
ence are made of the same condensed emptiness—there is no longer
an experience. Once you know who you are, there is no experiencer
or experience, there is just emptiness, or a no-experience experience
of the quantum field.
    In the Hindu scripture The Ramayana, Lord Ram, who is
quantum consciousness, is served by Hanuman. One of Hanuman's
clearest statements to Lord Ram is, "when I don't know who I am,
l serve you. When I know who I am. I am you."
     This, in essence, is Hanuman, He serves quantum when he
perceives separation. When He is quantum or Ram then he knows
himself, and is quantum (Ram). Hanuman actually never changes:
Hanuman is Ram, Ram is Hanuman. In the same way, we are in
quantum consciousness and are quantum consciousness even if we
don't know it.
    In the quantum understanding, nothing does nothing to nothing,
and even this is not true, because it would only be true if someone
                                                          The Last Voyage - 223
observed it. Therefore Quantum Consciousness IS, and Quantum
Consciousness isn't. It is like the old joke, "how many Zen Masters
does it take to change alight bulb?""Two. One to do it, and one not
to do it."


                 Quantum Exercise 73
     This exercise is an extension illustrating turning your
     attention around. It comes from Douglas Harding's
     book, On Having No Head. (Harding, 1986:42)*

     Step I:          Take your index finger and point it toward
                      your head.

     Step II:         Notice if there is anything there.


    This was the experience I had when I was sitting in meditation
in 1988, when I decided to look for the one who was meditating.
There was no one there.


               Quantum Exercise 74
     From Douglas Harding.

     To be done in a group, with the rotating facilitator reading
     the following.

     Let your eyes close and ask yourself:

     1. Going on your present experience without using
     your memory or mind, "are you a man , a woman, or
     neither?"

*"to turn around the arrow of ones attention ... if only he is willing to drop for a moment
opinions about himself based on hearsay and memory and irrmgination, and to rely on
PRESENT EVIDENCE."
224 - Quantum Consciousness
    2. Going on your present experience without using
    your memory or mind,"are you in a body, out of a body,
    or neither?"

    3. Going on your present experience without using
    your memory or mind, "are you form, formless, or
    neither?"

    4.Going on your present experience without using your
    memory or mind, "are you defined, undefined, or nei-
    ther?"

    Often times in workshops, and with many clients I've seen, the
response is the same, "Neither." This demonstrates that people are
experiencing themselves beyond "normal" and "conventional"
definitions.

    "This way .. Seeing into Nothingness - is the very start of
    a Spiritual Life."(Harding, 1988)


             Quantum Exercise 75

    With eyes closed and attention turned around, the
    group leader says: