Common Questions
     A student asked, "Where does this part-(icle) go?" I replied,
"When there is no contrast, there is no conflict, so it de-constructs
or ck-condenses." The local condensation of the quantum field
stops condensing. It is not that it disappears, but it changes back to
its decondensed nature, which is the quantum field or emptiness."
     Another student said, "My part-(icle) was about being angry
with my husband because he doesn't give me what I want. My
feelings and position on that didn't change and didn't disappear.
What should I do?"
      I said, "first of all you are going to have to go back andfeeland
experience your feelings of wanting. Secondly,l would recommend
creating the feelings of wanting again, and again, and again until
you can witness or observe that feeling. Next, you will have to be
willing to have the anger or not have the anger. What I mean is, that
if you do these exercises to get rid of something, you are resisting
the feelings you are trying to get rid of. You have to be able to bePee
to have orPee to not have the feelings. Then, when you see the
feelings and the space as being made of the same substance, you can
notice or be interested in what happens. "Notice" and "interested"
are the important words. You could even use the word "curious",
while allowing whatever to happen when the feeling is viewed as
the same as the emptiness surrounding it. Remember, (as mentioned
in Chapter IV) these exercises are done with no intention.
    This does not mean that you should give up what you want from
your husband. It does mean, however, that when you develop the
ability to observe the emptiness organizing into form and form
moving back to emptiness, the choice of what to do or not to do in
regard to your relationship will become clearer.


                 The Physical Body
      One other thing needs to be noted. The physical body has
particular, organic, biological functioning. To put it more bluntly,
I'll quote an Indian teacher of mine who said, "All our time is spent
eating, sleeping, shitting, and fucking, or how to make more money
so you have a better place to do it in." Bodily responses are not
184 - Quantum Consciousness
processible. The body needs to eat, sleep, shit and fuck. Problems
arise when sex becomes a substitute for feeling a lack of love, or
food becomes a substitute for security or comfort. Sleep ortiredness
can be a depression or a way of resisting feeling. This process,
whereby, an individual sublimates or substitutes food for a lack of
self-esteem is processible. Quantum Psychology does not, like
many spiritual disciplines, talk about abstinence or resisting a
bodily function like food, sex, or sleep. Rather, Quantum Psychol-
ogy suggests that the sublimation or substitution of wanting love for
food as a compulsion can be de-constructed by recognizing its
origin, the emptiness. The bodily functions will continue, while the
self-defeating tendency of sublimation leaves people not feeling
free or getting what they really want. It is the resistance to a bodily
function, or abstinence, that causes problems. Why? Because it is
labeled as "unholy" or "not godly"to feel sexual. It is something to
be resisted. Those feelings must be keptthere so that you can always
know what you're not suppose to have. Furthermore, it causes
sublimation or substitution.
    Noted psychiatrist Dr. Wilhelm Reich suggests further that
abstinence from sexual orgasm closes the natural ability the body
has to discharge energy. This energy, rather than going out through
the genitals, must go somewhere. Where does it go? Reich suggests
that the energy moves upward toward the head, causing more
thoughts. Consequently, the sexual abstinence, professed by East-
ern spiritual disciplines to promote a "quite, calm, peaceful" mind,
might yield opposite results. Certainly, this was true in my case
because the energy did notgo out but wentto my head and into more
thoughts.
    Furthermore, Reich suggests strongly that forced sexual absti-
nence (celibacy) forces the energy upward into fantasy causing the
fantasized mysnjication of the world. This is why members of the
celibate, spiritual community, I was involved with, along with
myself, tended to mystify everything into the fantasy of gods and
goddesses as part of the "magical thinking" of our daily experi-
ences. This would also explain the mystification of the teachers or
guru. Imposed celibacy in the community I lived in caused mysti-
fication of the "power" of the man or woman Guru. Often times
devotees would project such magical qualities onto the teacher
making statements like, "he knows exactly what I need," or he
                                                               The Living Void - 185

knows my every thought or desire." This "magical" mystification
of a teacher can be traced back to age-regressed childhood states,
where Mommy and Daddy are responsible for you and many times
stayed vigilant to fulfill your needs.*
    Often times, parents will say, "if you need it, I'll give itto you."
The child takes this idealized and spiritualized parent and projects
it on the guru or god. Children believe that pleasing the parent gets
them what they need from the parent; this too is projected on the
outer teacher or god.
      Parallels between pleasing the guru, or God, and pleasing Mom
and Dad can be drawn. The co-dependence or necessary depen-
dence of the child on the parents for survival can carry through in
an age-regressed ego state within the adult, as he/she projects hisl
her Mommy and Daddy on an "idealized" teacher. In the middle
seventies, I used to call this process "transpersonal transference",
whereby god, Gum, or teacher is attributed magical powers by the
adult/child. The paths, so often given as the only solution, are
simply parent to child trances. For example, a child is told, "if
you're good, you'll get love." The mystified teacher/projected
idealized parent says, "be good, follow my rules, and you'll get
liberation, bliss, love, etc. My father's enlightenment was a house
in the suburbs and two kids. Many teacher's heaven is ... fill in the
blanks. I mention this because Quantum Psychology does not claim
to be the only way.
      Quantum Psychology does not suggest good or bad. While in an
Indian monastery my friends and I were always waiting for the
"divine meat axe" for doing something we should not be doing or
thinking, just as in my house as a child. One teacher said people are
much smarter than God. People know all about good and bad, right
and wrong,high and low, sin and virtue. God doesn't know anything
about these. GOD JUST IS."
   One workshop participant said, "I am left with nothing. I feel
empty and a little depressed."
   I read a quote from noted physicist John Wheeler.

      "The nothingness of space can be seen as composed of
      fundamentalbuilding blocks. If we could examine it micro-
      scopically we would find that the fabric of space-time or

*This trance of spiritualization is discussed in depth in depth in The Trances of the Inner Child: The
Dark Side, Chapter 14. Bramble Books, Publication date: Fall 1993.
186 - Quantum Consciousness
    'superspace' is composed of a turbulent sea of bubbles."
    (DeWitt and Wheeler, 1968)

    This can further be appreciated in the context of Chinese
Philosophy and more specifically Taoism. The Chinese use the
word Chi to denote the basic energy emanating from this living
breathing emptiness. Chi can condense into objects or thin-out into
emptiness.

    "When the Chi condenses, its visibility becomes apparent
    so that there are then the shapes of individual things, when
    it disperses, its visibility is nolonger apparent and there are
    no shapes. The Great Void cannot but consist of Chi; this
    Chi cannot but condense to form allthings; and these things
    cannotbut become dispersed, so as to form (once more) the
    Great Void." (Fung,1958:279-228)

   In terms of physics, Wheeler says these bubbles are the warp
and weft of empty space and comprise, what Wheeler calls, the
"Quantum foam." He states, "The space of quantum geometro-
dynamics can be compared to a carpet of foam spread over a slowly
undulating landscape"...The continual microscopic changes in the
carpet of foam, as new bubbles appear and old ones disappear,
symbolize the quantum fluctuations in geometry." (DeWitt and
Wheeler, 1968).