recent years emerged as its own religious studies subfield. Meanwhile, schol-
ars working in the field of esotericism have (with a few notable exceptions)
neglected such developments.2
    The neglect is largely due to the strong historiographical emphasis in previ-
ous research on Western esotericism. Although the professionalization of the
field has largely come about within religious studies, major scholarly impulses
have come from historians of ideas, historians of science, and historians of
art – typically specializing in Renaissance and early modern European culture.
Expertise in the field has clustered around these lines of historical inquiry,
with the most influential definitions and delimitations of the field following
suit with the interests of central researchers.3 In addition, despite an often-
stated embrace of interdisciplinarity, an overall reluctance to incorporate
social scientific approaches has characterized the field. This has certainly had
some repercussions: a fundamental challenge for the study of the esoteric in
the present day is that it is not sufficient to simply transpose theories, defini-
tions and methodologies developed for the study of, say, Renaissance magic
to analyse contemporary magical practices. In short, studying contemporary
phenomena poses both new problems and intriguing possibilities, the chal-
lenge to incorporate social scientific theories and methodologies being a
central one. It would seem that for a proper study of contemporary esoteri-
cism to succeed, several theoretical and methodological concerns need to be
addressed.
    Starting from these observations, the present volume brings into atten-
tion the multifaceted status of esoteric discourse in the contemporary West.
The authors combine historical awareness and findings from the historical
study of esoteric currents with new theory and methodology required for
contemporary issues. The chapters deal with currents and issues of particular
importance for understanding the place of the esoteric in today’s world, and
specifically discuss theoretical and methodological implications raised by the
study of contemporary esotericism.




      we use “pre-Christian religion(s)” when discussing various religious expressions present in
      Europe prior to the introduction of Christianity. In a few isolated cases “pagan” or “pagan-
      ism” are used and the reference is then to emic discourse, either historical Christian polem-
      ical projections of “the Other”, or more current reversals of these polemics that project a
      non-Christian Self into the past.
   2. Examples include Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, and much of the
      work of Olav Hammer.
   3. Here we are thinking especially of Antoine Faivre’s influential historical definition,
      which has been criticized for lack of a clear analytic rationale while being conspicuously
      well suited to cover Faivre’s own specific areas of interest. See Faivre, Access to Western
      Esotericism, 10–15; cf. von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 83.



2
                                                                      introduction



UNRAVELLING PROBLEMS WITH THE STUDY OF ESOTERICISM

As already noted, the relative lack of research on contemporary esotericism
from scholars in the field seems to be connected in part with a general reluc-
tance to incorporate perspectives, theories, and methodology from the social
sciences. In fact, it is commonplace within the field to encounter at least a mild
form of hostility towards social science, although it is seldom developed into
an explicit polemic. One resulting problem is that any introductory course on
esotericism that aims to deal also with contemporary phenomena cannot rely
solely on standard introductory volumes and reference works in the field. As
none of these sufficiently address contemporary expressions and concerns,
they must be complemented by scholarship from elsewhere, which most
often needs to be “translated” to fit overall themes and approaches. Kocku von
Stuckrad’s otherwise competent Western Esotericism: A Brief History of Secret
Knowledge (2005) is, for example, rather thin on recent and contemporary
developments, although it does end with a general discussion of “Esotericism
and Modernity”.4 This is a result of the lack of scholarship in the field in this
subject area, and von Stuckrad makes no claim to provide a detailed account
here. However, the problem is more acute in Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke’s The
Western Esoteric Traditions: A Historical Introduction (2008), where some-
thing in the way of a claim to completeness is made. The book contains a
chapter entitled “Ritual Magic from 1850 to the Present”,5 but curiously “the
present” seems to end in the 1950s!
   The neglect of contemporary phenomena can partly be attributed to the
fact that most researchers in the field identify themselves as historians, and
often regard the present as outside their area of interest and expertise. This, of
course, is a limited view of “history”, which, after all, is constantly created. The
realm of the historian thus includes the present and the recent past. Another
related reason can be sought in the methodological familiarity and “comfort
zone” of the strict historian. While historical material may appear “frozen in
time”, and thus ordered and easier to subject to meticulous scrutiny, tracing
lineages, historical relations and so forth, contemporary material will seem
chaotic and ever-changing, and consequently more difficult to “catch” in the
way one is used to from historical records. An investigation of such material
can be frustrating, and can easily appear unorganized and “unscientific”.
   This historical bias can be exemplified by way of an anecdote from a confer-
ence a few years back. A speaker who had presented an overview of Russian
esotericism, neopaganism, secret societies, and related publications up to
the mid-twentieth century was asked the question: “What about expressions
of these trends in contemporary Russia?” The response was simply, “I am a


   4. von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 133–46.
   5. Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 191–209.



                                                                                  3
egil asprem and kennet granholm



­ istorian, not an anthropologist”, thus positioning the question as irrelevant in
h
the context (which, of course, it was not). Whatever the reasons for exclusions
of this kind, it seems clear that historical studies from the field of Western
esotericism must be combined with scholarship from studies of new religions,
“pagan studies” and so on if a more comprehensive picture is sought. In order
to succeed, bridges must be constructed to overcome the incongruities in
method, theory and approaches that exist between the different segments of
complementary scholarship.
    The incongruities partly depend on differing disciplinary rationales, with
most studies of contemporary “esotericism” being sociologically or sometimes
anthropologically informed. The dislike of social scientific approaches in the
study of esotericism was already noted. To the present authors, this aversion
seems connected to similar biases in the history of religion, which followed the
influence of Mircea Eliade. Eliade and the phenomenological school of “his-
tory of religion” associated with him tended to oppose sociology due to what
was perceived as its inherent “reductionism”.6 In short, sociology was claimed
to present the religious as not forming a phenomenon sui generis, but instead
being an expression of broader social forces. In religious studies at large, this
fear of reductionism was heavily discussed and criticized more than twenty
years ago, and, despite the occasional local outbreak, aversions of this kind
now seem rather dated.7 In current scholarship on esotericism, however, this
“ghost of Eliade” may still be felt – as, for example, when Goodrick-Clarke dis-
misses “definitions of ‘the esoteric’ in terms of discourse, social constructions,
and legitimacy” because they “lack a hermeneutic interpretation of spirit and
spirituality as an independent ontological reality” – that is, refusing to describe
“it” as something sui generis and irreducible, indeed as “an autonomous and
essential aspect of the relationship between the mind and the cosmos”.8
    There seems to be a fear that dealing with sociological issues will in some
way diminish or infringe on the value of the subject. As many of the influences
of Eliade have been purged – such as his problematic ahistorical approach to
history – this simplistic paranoia about sociological reductionism should be
discarded as well. Involving sociological perspectives, and looking at the role
played by social factors in the formations of the esoteric, does not need to mean
that one reduces one’s subject to these particular social factors. Nevertheless,
the accusations of sociological approaches having been reductionist to the
extreme are not entirely unprovoked. Looking at sociological studies of the



   6. See Wasserstrom, Religion After Religion, 6, 257n6.
   7. For the “reductionism debate”, see e.g. Segal, “In Defense of Reductionism”; Idinopulos &
      Yonan, Religion and Reductionism.
   8. Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 12, 13. Cf. our continued discussion in
      Chapter 2 of the present volume.



4
                                                                                  introduction