safeguards than during the wild 1960s) if only the law had allowed it. For these
reasons, applying the post-1970 model of Harnerian “core shamanism” as a
model for describing the nature of neoshamanism as a historical phenomenon
is anachronistic and misleading: it reduces the phenomenon to only its sani-
tized and politically correct dimension intended for the general public. Much
more than as an example of the literary and popular reception of Siberian and
Native American spirituality – a sophisticated etic focus congenial to aca-
demic interests, and certainly fascinating in itself, but rather remote from the
emic concerns of practitioners “on the ground” – neoshamanism should be
seen, first of all, as a form of modern entheogenic religion. Having been born
from experimentation with natural psychoactives (entheogenic in the narrow
sense), it branched off into two directions after 1970: a “safe”, legal and there-
fore publicly visible ritual and psychotherapeutic practice (entheogenic in the
wider sense), and a clandestine underground culture that continued to work
with psychoactives.
   The main outlines of the pre-prohibition phase are reasonably clear,29
although more critical research from outsiders would certainly be welcome.
The most crucial pioneer was the investment banker R. Gordon Wasson, who
developed a fascination with the cultural significance of mushrooms since
1927 and, in the summer of 1955, participated in mushroom ceremonies with
the Mexican Mezatec shamaness Maria Sabina. Two years later, in 1957, a
lavishly illustrated account of these sessions in Life magazine30 made Wasson
and Sabina into instant celebrities. The article in question, “Seeking the Magic
Mushroom”, inspired Timothy Leary to follow in Wasson’s footsteps and travel
to Mexico, where he set up the Harvard Psilocybin Project; later in the 1960s,
Maria Sabina’s residence Huautla was overrun by hippie tourists. A parallel
and converging development emerged from William Burroughs’s participa-
tion in ayahuasca ceremonies in the Amazon in 1953, and similar explorations
by his friend Allen Ginsberg in 1960, resulting in a classic of the psyche-
delic counterculture known as The Yage Letters (1963).31 Riding the wave of
growing popular excitement about these indigenous entheogenic traditions,
anthropologists like Carlos Castaneda and Michael J. Harner began exploring
Mexican and Amazon traditions; and it is on this basis that they eventually
became literary and practical founding figures of what was to become known
as “neoshamanism”.
   After the prohibition of psychoactive drugs, this original form of neo­
shamanic practice somehow continued as an underground tradition through
the 1970s and into the 1980s. How this happened exactly and on what scale,
which personal networks were involved, how they developed, and how its
participants communicated and exchanged information, remains largely

 29. For a short overview, see e.g. Znamenski, Beauty of the Primitive, 121–64.
 30. Wasson, “Seeking the Magic Mushroom”.
 31. Burroughs & Ginsberg, Yage Letters Redux.


402
                                                                     entheogenic esotericism



unknown at present. Since many participants and sympathizers are still alive
and potentially available for interviews, one can only hope that somebody will
pick up the question and try to write the history of this ­lineage, particularly for
the period of the 1970s and the early 1980s. There is no doubt that with the
emergence of rave culture by the mid-1980s and the spread of the Internet,
entheogenic neoshamanism (in the narrow sense) re-emerged in public view.
It became accessible and attractive to a new generation, and because the
Internet makes discussion of potentially illegal practices so much safer and
easier, the number of online sources relevant to entheogens and shamanism
has exploded exponentially. At present, it is simply overwhelming.


ENTHEOGENIC ESOTERICISM

In this short programmatic article I cannot do more than try to illustrate the
nature of contemporary entheogenic shamanism as exemplified by a few rep-
resentative figures. Arguably its central figurehead was the American prophet
of an “archaic revival”, Terence McKenna (1946–2000). Elsewhere I have
described how his intense entheogenic experiences in the Colombian Amazon
forest in 1971, together with his brother Dennis and some friends, inspired
him to develop a radical spiritual worldview that stands at the very origin of
contemporary millenarian fascination with the year 2012.32 Several books
published by McKenna in the early 1990s have become classics of the new
underground scene of entheogenic shamanism;33 and McKenna himself has
attained an iconic status as “public intellectual” in that context, not least due
to a series of audio and video recordings of his lectures that are now easily
accessible online. His charismatic status rests upon the unique combination
of a sharp intellect, a high level of erudition, a delightful self-relativizing sense
of humour and excellent communication skills (his books are extremely well
written, and his unmistakable nasal voice and hypnotic style of delivery has
even been sampled in trance music recordings online) – all in the service of
expounding one of the weirdest worldviews imaginable.
   McKenna’s mature work is a 1990s upgrade of the radical countercultural
ideals of the 1960s, and appeals to a new generation that sympathizes with the
hippie culture of that period, but does not share its anti-­technological bias.34
At the heart of this “cultic milieu” we find a profound sense of ­cultural cri-
sis: Western society, built upon the life-denying and totalitarian dogmatisms


 32. Hanegraaff, “‘And End History’”. On McKenna’s worldview, see also Kripal, Esalen, 369–
     375. In spite of its remarkable popularity, 2012 millenarianism is another aspect of contem-
     porary esotericism that seems to be neglected almost completely by academic research.
 33. McKenna & McKenna, Invisible Landscape; McKenna, Archaic Revival; McKenna, Food of
     the Gods; McKenna, True Hallucinations.
 34. Zandbergen, “Silicon Valley New Age”, 161.


                                                                                            403
wouter j . hanegraaff



of traditional Christianity and materialist science, is spiritually bankrupt and
heading for military and ecological disaster. In a deliberately utopian search
for how humanity might find a way “back to the garden”, McKenna is referring
first of all to indigenous cultures that are still in touch with nature and with the
“archaic” roots of humanity. But underneath this most immediately obvious
emphasis on “shamanic” cultures, there is an intellectual discourse grounded
in assumptions proper to Western esotericism. While references to it can be
found throughout his work, this background is nowhere more explicit than in
a series of unpublished “Lectures on Alchemy” delivered at Esalen, California,
around 1990, available online as an unedited transcript.35
    These lectures show the enormous impact of what I would like to refer to as
Eranos religionism. Religionism means the exploration of historical develop-
ments in view of eternal truths or realities that transcend history and change.36
Characterized by a valuation of myth and symbolism over doctrine and dis-
cursive rationality, this inherently paradoxical but intellectually fascinating
project was central to the famous Eranos meetings organized since 1933 in
Ascona, Switzerland;37 and largely due to the financial support of the Bollingen
foundation, it became enormously successful in the United States after World
War II. Many of the central scholars associated with Eranos – notably Carl
Gustav Jung, Mircea Eliade, Gershom Scholem, D. T. Suzuki, James Hillman
and Joseph Campbell – achieved an iconic status in the American popular
(counter)culture, and their ideas have become essential to post-war under-
standings of “esotericism”.38 It is only since the “empirical turn” in the study of
Western esotericism since the early 1990s that this religionist perspective has
come to be perceived, at least in the academic world, as primarily an object of
research – a sophisticated form of post-war esotericism – rather than as an
appropriate methodology for research.39
    McKenna’s understanding of “alchemy” and “hermeticism” turns out to be a
typical example of Eranos religionism, with Jung and Eliade as central figures.
From this perspective, he was making a valiant effort to introduce his audi-
ence to Frances Yates’s classic Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition
(1964), her ideas about the Rosicrucian Enlightenment, and even a wide col-
lection of original hermetic and alchemical texts, next to some of his favourite
philosophers such as Plato, Plotinus, Bruno, Bergson and Whitehead. During

 35. McKenna, “Lectures on Alchemy”. The transcript available online would deserve some
     thorough editing, particular as regards the many spectacular misspelling of titles and
     names of authors that were clearly unknown to the transcriber but can still be identified
     (although sometimes barely) by specialists.
 36. For extensive discussion of religionism and its various manifestations, see Hanegraaff,
     Esotericism and the Academy, especially chapters 2 and 4.
 37. On Eranos and its cultural impact, see Ibid., chapter 4, and the standard history by Hakl,
     Verborgene Geist von Eranos.
 38. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 4.
 39. Ibid.


404
                                                        entheogenic esotericism



the course of his lectures he read and discussed long passages from the Corpus
Hermeticum, the Asclepius, and the Theatrum Chemicum Britannicum. In
short, he was giving his audience a crash course in the main currents of early
modern esotericism, presented as the epitome of a traditional enchanted
worldview radically different from the wasteland of modernity and contem-
porary society. A good example of how McKenna combined his considerable
knowledge of alchemical literature with a creative form of “esoteric herme-
neutics” is his discussion of mercury: