The fact that LaVey’s previously hidden “tradition” is described as transcul-
tural – he writes that it “transcends ethnic, racial and economic differences
and temporal ideologies”62 – brings to mind the analogues between Eastern
and Western traditions that are typical of esoteric perennialism, a theme to
which we shall now turn.


LEFT HAND AND RIGHT HAND, EAST AND WEST

 The notion of unity of all religious faiths, a prevalent legend among esoteri-
 cists, is given a different spin by LaVey.63 Where Theosophists and many New
 Agers would claim all religions are basically the same at their core, for example,
 LaVey divides them into Right-Hand and Left-Hand Path varieties that stand
 in opposition to one another. But within each of these distinct categories, dif-
 ferent creeds are pretty much alike: the left liberates and the right repress-
 es.64 To LaVey, allegedly Left-Hand Path groups like the Yezidi in the Middle
East are in essence very similar to the medieval Templars, erotic sects in
­eighteenth- and nineteenth-century Russia and Satanists in 1960s California.
    Supposedly, there are also historical connections. According to LaVey, the
 Templars encountered the Yezidi during their journeys and as a result later
 developed “one of the most significant rites of Satanism”.65 Through this meet-
ing of Yezidi and Templars, Eastern “prideful, life-adoring principles joined
with Western goal-oriented materialism”, and these ideas lived on in various
later fraternal orders.66 The Yezidi themselves were, he claims, “a link between
Egypt, Eastern Europe, and Tibet”.67 Their influence, he says, made itself known
in most of the underground Satanism that preceded the Church of Satan.68 In
 Blanche Barton’s biography of LaVey, we find a description of how LaVey ritu-
 ally shaved his head when he founded the Church of Satan, something that is
 “[t]raditional to the Yezidi devil worshippers” as a rite of passage.69
    In his appropriation of various exotic elements, LaVey utilizes the esotericist
 strategy described by Olav Hammer where the use of correspondences hides

 62. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 104.
 63. On this notion, see Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 155, 161.
 64. On the history of these originally Indian terms in the context of Western esotericism, and
     how the Left-Hand Path can be defined, see Granholm, “Embracing Others Than Satan”;
     for an update, see Granholm, “Esoteric Currents as Discursive Complexes”.
 65. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 55. The Yezidi are mentioned also in LaVey, The Satanic Bible,
     43, 59, but are given a much less prominent place there. That the Templars were Satanists
     – in the sense that they revered Satan – is decidedly emic historiography, as scholarly
     experts on them agree they were certainly nothing of the sort. See for instance Partner, The
     Murdered Magicians; Barber, The New Knighthood.
 66. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 55.
 67. Ibid., 152.
 68. Ibid., 155.
 69. Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 82.


84
                                                 secret lineages and de facto satanists



cultural differences. For example, Russian symbols and deities are equalled
with items of Yezidi and Graeco-Roman origin.70 He repeatedly declares his
work to be transcultural, incorporating elements from many types of esoteri-
cism. “Satanic Ritual”, he explains, “is a blend of Gnostic, cabbalistic, Hermetic,
and masonic elements” and even if he freely mixes practices from a variety of
different countries and times “it will be easy to perceive a basic undercurrent
through the central variants”.71 Perhaps this undercurrent is easy to perceive
because many of the rituals have been constructed by LaVey himself, and do
not have the origin in distant places and times he claims. This does not mean
LaVey is a liar, any more than is the case with an author of fiction employing
his inventiveness and poetic licence. Incensed reactions accusing him of for-
gery, as I have frequently encountered among Satanists not belonging to the
Church of Satan, simply miss the point. The Satanic “tradition”, ritual texts,
even Satan himself, are all fiction to LaVey. They are consciously constructed
by him to be used with certain purposes, not as something to believe in the
same way a Mormon clings to the veracity of Joseph Smith’s texts or a devout
Pentecostal views God.
    The figure used as the Church of Satan’s prime symbol is explained to be
a transcultural, timeless one: “We are not limited to one deity, but encom-
pass all the expressions of the accuser or the one who advocates free thought
and rational alternatives by whatever name he is called in a particular time
and land. It so happens that we are living in a culture that is predominantly
Judeo-Christian, so we emphasize Satan”.72 But the reasons why LaVey advo-
cates transcultural bricolage are quite different from those of Blavatsky or New
Age writers. When he boldly proclaims “You aren’t limited to Judeo-Christian
myths”, the motivation has nothing to do with a supposed unity of figures –
taken from different contexts – on a level of true esoteric understanding, but
is based on his view of religious ideas as simply colourful fiction: “Unlike those
who depend on dogma and blind faith, you can choose your fictions to live
by”.73 His perennialism and use of material from other cultures thus has highly
pragmatic rationalist underpinnings, instead of being grounded in mystical
insights. Interestingly, he still often ends up handling his material in much the
same way esotericists in general do.




 70. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 132; Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 160–61.
 71. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 21. A variation on this theme can also be found further on in
     the same book, where LaVey states: “The guiding thoughts behind Satanic rituals past and
     present have emanated from diverse minds and places, yet all operate on much the same
     ‘frequency’” (Ibid., 26).
 72. LaVey, quoted in Barton, The Church of Satan, 71. Cf. Granholm, “Embracing Others Than
     Satan”. He does not mention this statement from LaVey, but this is only natural since the
     article focuses on the Temple of Set, Rune-Gild and Dragon Rouge.
 73. LaVey, quoted in Barton, The Church of Satan, 96.


                                                                                           85
per faxneld



LITERARY SATANISM AS “TRADITION” AND HIGHBROW CULTURAL CAPITAL

Regarding the Black Mass presented in The Satanic Rituals, LaVey mentions
that the text draws on sources such as Baudelaire and Huysmans. Indeed,
the latter’s description in his novel Là-Bas (“Down There”, 1891; published
in English as The Damned) seems to be the main source of inspiration, and
thus LaVey’s claim that his ritual “is the version performed by the Societé des
Luciferiens in late nineteenth and early twentieth century France” needs to be
taken with a grain of salt.74 The fictional basis is highlighted by his biographer
Barton as well, who writes: “In Anton’s church all the Satanic fantasies became
realities.”75 These are not the words of a representative of a group that con-
siders itself steeped in ancient tradition, but of a group whose founder fully
admits to having constructed its rituals based on fiction. In The Satanic Bible,
LaVey explains: “Your ritual chamber is your fantasy world.”76 A fantasy world,
one might add, that draws heavily on nineteenth-century literary fantasies.
    Literary tradition seems to serve a more conventional legitimating func-
tion than esoteric tradition. The Church of Satan obviously enjoys the cultural
capital and historical legitimacy Satanism gains from old literary panegyrics to
Lucifer. For instance, contemporary Satanist hearts swell with pride at the fact
that Nobel prize-winner Giosuè Carducci wrote “Inno a Satana” (1863), a long
poem celebrating Satan. In an essay about the poet on the church’s homepage,
“R. Merciless” states: “Carducci’s credentials as a Satanist include not only
his worldly successes and overt opposition to Christianity but his writing of
the highly controversial poem, Inno a Satana”. In other words, Carducci is
hailed both as a de facto Satanist, and as an explicit one. It appears impor-
tant to “Merciless” to emphasize (quite correctly, it is worth noting) the fact
that Carducci “stepped firmly beyond his paganism and even his anti-cleri-
calism into the realm of modern Satanism by embracing the mythic character
of Satan as an exemplary role model and heroic archetypal symbol”, some-
thing that to “Merciless” is in fact “the defining characteristic of the Modern
Satanist”.77 Even if Carducci would not have used the term Satanist about him-
self, he all the same, “Merciless” proudly proclaims, belongs “firmly within the
Satanic tradition”.78 This is in line with LaVey’s description of Carducci’s poem
as a precursor of contemporary Satanism in The Satanic Rituals.79
    LaVey himself frequently connects his rituals to literature. His Black Mass
is, he admits, inspired by Huysman’s Là-Bas, and his “Tierdrama” ritual is, he
states, based on an Illuminati ritual that influenced writers (who, according to


 74.   LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 34 (cf. 37–53); Huysmans, The Damned (Là-Bas), 222–7.
 75.   Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 88.
 76.   LaVey, quoted in Barton, The Church of Satan, 96.
 77.   Merciless, “Giosuè Carducci”.
 78.   Ibid.
 79.   LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 77.


86
                                                    secret lineages and de facto satanists