mainstream religions both carry the seal of the alien, draconian beasts. Icke
effortlessly constructs correspondences (and substantive identity) between
symbols and actors across time, culture, and political and religious identities.
They all derive from the same source and have the same purpose: “casting a
spell on the human mind and emotions” in order to destroy human under-
standing of “who we really are” – part of an energetic, divine whole with “no
us and them, only we and ultimately ‘I’”.65
   Even the reptilians are, in the final meaning, part of this “I”, so why do they
destroy this understanding? At the more limited level of being where separate-
ness exists, they are obsessed with power:

        Humans who understand their true nature, power and worth
        would be impossible to manipulate … Only by delinking human-
        ity from this knowledge has it been possible to orchestrate the
        ­reptilian-Brotherhood Agenda over thousands of years. The crea-
         tion of religion and official “science” has been fundamental to that
         and … the same secret societies were responsible for establishing
         both.66

Fear is essential to how the reptilians control humans. This is part of the expla-
nation, claims Icke, for the assassinations of John F. Kennedy, Princess Diana,
and others.67 It is also part of the explanation for war and crises. To create
the strongest possible negative feelings associated with fear and guilt, so that
it may dominate consciousness, “the Brotherhood use horrific Satanic rituals
and sacrifice”.68 Initiates into their order are forced to participate in these ritu-
als to ascertain their synchronization into “the reptilian wavelengths”. More
broadly, the construction of fear is said to stimulate the kind of society and
behaviour the reptilians desire, and to do so through “vibrational patterns”
leaving traces in our DNA. As if that was not ­sufficient, the reptilians are also
claimed to work their mind control through technology, including “implants”
of thought control devices.69 These are, again, part of the plan to take con-
trol of human agency so that it is locked to a fearful existence on this plane
of being. A preparation for this, recalling Steiner and his modern disciple, is
the weakening of the mind–body through vaccines, which have been a tool
of keeping mankind ill and functioning below par, and an important develop-
ment in getting “access keys to the body-computer”.70 The function is simi-
lar to that promised by Steiner and his more anti-vaccine followers, in that it
works both against bodily and spiritual health.

 65.   Ibid., 472.
 66.   Ibid., 472–3.
 67.   Ibid., 478.
 68.   Ibid., 474.
 69.   Icke, The David Icke Guide, 391–4.
 70.   Ibid., 547.

214
                                                        hidden knowledge , hidden powers



    Icke’s style is declarative. He presents his claims to knowledge as statements
of fact, and he uses the gamut of “New Age” validations of knowledge,71 from
personal experience and testimonials to science. He stresses the latter in the
form of his own “research” with supportive testimonials as “independent con-
firmation”, whether through others’ research, channelling, or allegedly auto-
biographical information. Outside “research” is selected to support his own
theses, and it is narrated within the story Icke wants to tell. Much of his writ-
ing consists of retelling other “rejected knowledge”, repackaged to suit his own
theories. In addition to strategies that at times parallel or serve as secularized
versions of esoteric knowledge-strategies, Icke also employs “traditional” eso-
teric ones. “The Cabala”, he writes, “is the secret knowledge hidden in codes
within the Old Testament and other texts”, and the sacred texts of “all the
religions” are written in such code.72 They all contain secret knowledge to be
revealed. He goes on to reveal true names and “their true meaning”. Similarly,
he decodes the “true meaning” of colours, numbers and symbols, where simi-
larity is made into identity across time and space. Everything concerns deeper
truths and higher knowledge, hidden by esoteric elites and “hidden in the code
of the mystery schools”.73
    Although standing in clear continuity with the broader “New Age” milieu,
Icke is a critical member. He sees New Age as being ignorant of the dark, rep-
tilian forces, calling it “spirituality as escapism”.74 Still, the solutions and the
salvific messages are in line with the milieu: We may be programmed and
controlled intellectually, but our emotions and intuition, as long as they are
guided by love, not fear, will set us straight – and free:

        You think with your intellect and that is so vulnerable to program-
        ming through the eyes and ears by the daily diet of lies, suppression
        and misrepresentation in the media and by all those Brotherhood
        clones to which it offers a platform. But when we feel, we are tap-
        ping into our heart centre, our intuition, that connection with the
        cosmos.75

Intuition is a way to knowledge more certain than what the intellect can pro-
vide alone. When Icke states that “the truth shall make you free”,76 it is a truth
where feeling and rationality are reintegrated and set to work by “healing”
through love.77 For this to happen, Icke’s own texts and the conspiracy lore he
presents are a necessary step.

 71.   See e.g. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge.
 72.   Icke, The Biggest Secret, 84.
 73.   Ibid., 85.
 74.   Ibid., 486.
 75.   Ibid., 502.
 76.   E.g. Icke, … And the Truth Shall Set you Free.
 77.   Icke, The Biggest Secret, 504.

                                                                                    215
asbjørn dyrendal



Jim Marrs and the rule of secrecy

Denial of accidents in toto is one of the traits often used for describing “grand
conspiracy”. Conspiracy lies at the heart of history and how one views it,
writes Jim Marrs, now one of the veterans in conspiracy theory: “Here there
are only two views: accidental or conspiratorial.”78
    Starting out from “event conspiracies” like the John F. Kennedy assassina-
tion, Marrs broadened out to “UFO cover-ups” and extraterrestrial presence,
and more comprehensive theories encompassing the totality of history (and
some prehistory). Literature theorist Samuel Chase Coale called his Rule by
Secrecy “the quintessential text that reveals the ultimate vision of conspiracy of
the era … the Bible of conspiracy”.79 Although many other writers and texts vie
for the title, Marrs does have prominence similar to Icke.
    Marrs’s texts belong to the secular side of conspiracy culture. Not in the
sense of pressing an explicitly secular agenda, but in the sense that he, unlike
many other writers of “grand conspiracy”, does not present an explicitly reli-
gious agenda of his own. While he sometimes, and mostly in the “final per-
spective”, includes extraterrestrials and “the alien agenda”80 into the picture,
what might have been explicitly religious overtones are secularized. Unlike
with Icke, there is no talk about soul, spiritual development, or salvation from
anything but an oppressive conspiracy and their evil plan. They may at times
be called “satanic” or alleged to be Satanists, but he attributes no supernatural
abilities to them. Nor are there explicit references to supernatural modes of
acquiring knowledge, although such were employed by some of the “research”
he relies on.
    Marrs’s main interest lies in the influence of “secret societies” on economics
and politics.81 These are the main areas where he sees the limitation of human
freedom, and where the abuse of power by the conspiracy interferes deeply
with the lives of people. They do so, for instance, through the production of
wars and economic crises, both of which spread anxiety, fear and misery, leav-
ing more control in the hands of the conspirators. Economic matters acquire
a special importance for “thought control”: not only are the media generally
owned by the conspiracy, their revenues controlled by big business, but – by
listing a set of prominent media figures as “members of ” the Bilderberg group,
Council on Foreign Relations, or the Trilateral Commission – he includes
them as pawns of “NWO” or worse.82 This is why “we” are not informed of the
nefarious plans of these groups, and how “we” are kept passive. In ­addition


 78. Marrs, Rule by Secrecy, 6.
 79. Coale, Paradigms of Paranoia, 22.
 80. Marrs, Alien Agenda.
 81. Bankers are also presented as a secret society (Marrs, Rule by Secrecy, 77), and the econ-
     omy likened to religion.
 82. Marrs, Rule by Secrecy, 105.


216
                                                          hidden knowledge , hidden powers