this process of detraditionalization, then the inherent eclecticism of esoteri-
cism is an even better fit for the ethos of the late modern citizen. Furthermore,
this eclectic function was in place long before “modernity” (as understood in
a sociological sense). In fact, this may amount to a criticism of Heelas’s under-
standing of detraditionalization, as the de facto disembedding of cultural data
and their re-embedding in new contexts has very often been intrinsically
linked with specific esoteric claims to tradition – particularly forms of peren-
nialism, as we discuss at length later in this chapter.
   While we should thus keep the above discussion in mind, the problems
mentioned suggest to us that quite different analytical perspectives on “tradi-
tion” are needed for our concerns. We suggest that a fruitful way to go is to
follow a critical constructivist course, focusing on the ways in which “tradi-
tions” are constructed in specific historical, social and cultural contexts, and
the ways they are claimed by situated spokespersons, rather than trying to use
the term as an unproblematic analytic term to be employed by the scholar for
picking out features or developmental traits in a given “religion” or “culture”.


INVENTING TRADITION

In a seminal collection of essays from 1983, Eric Hobsbawm and Terence
Ranger launched a serious scholarly interest in the inventedness of tradi-
tion, and its social, historical and cultural significance.20 The authors noticed
how a large number of “traditions” in modern society (especially connected
with state, government and national culture and identity, which appeared to
present an aura of long-standing continuity with the past) were, upon further
scrutiny, in fact constructed in the relatively recent past. The invention of tra-
ditions was seen to be intrinsically linked to nationalist projects of the eight-
eenth and nineteenth centuries, and as responses to the great upheavals of
political and social revolutions, with Hobsbawm even pointing to a veritable
“mass-production of tradition” in the period between 1870 and 1914.21
   The notion of “invented tradition” was originally defined by Hobsbawm
as “a set of practices, normally governed by overtly or tacitly accepted rules
and of a ritual or symbolic nature, which seek to inculcate certain values and
norms of behaviour by repetition, which automatically implies continuity with
the past”.22 The focus was on the grand scale of society and on large, often
“secular” institutions. Nevertheless, as a general approach to researching tra-
ditions a focus on invention has significant value for the study of religion, as



 20. Hobsbawm & Ranger, The Invention of Tradition.
 21. Hobsbawm, “Mass-Producing Traditions”.
 22. Hobsbawm, “Introduction”, 2.


30
                                                                 constructing esotericisms



well as the study of esotericism.23 As Olav Hammer and James R. Lewis note,
every single known religious system cultivates invented traditions of one sort
or another. Often links are created to mythic or romanticized pasts; in addi-
tion we find a strong tendency to misattribute central texts, be it through
the creation of pseudepigraphic texts, the attribution of anonymous mater­
ial to a founding figure (e.g. Siddhartha, L. Ron Hubbard), a revered histori-
cal authority (e.g. Aristotle), or even non-existing or mythical persons (e.g.
Moses, Hermes, Zoroaster).24 As we shall see later in this chapter, this kind
of attribution has been a central part in the making of esoteric genealogies
of higher knowledge, emphasizing prisci theologi (whether mythical or real)
like Hermes and Zoroaster, or referring to entirely fictitious “secret traditions”,
such as in Rosicrucianism.
    While Hobsbawm focused on how invented traditions “inculcate certain
values and norms of behaviour by repetition”, analyses of such inventions in
esotericism have typically focused on the function they play in legitimating
authority and establishing an aura of unique authenticity. An extensive study
of “the appeal to tradition” as a rhetorical strategy in modern esoteric dis-
course was provided by Olav Hammer in Claiming Knowledge, which analysed
cases from the Theosophical appeal to “ancient sages” (which in 1875 were
Chaldaeans, hermeticists, and kabbalists but had morphed into Hindu yogis
and secret Tibetan masters by 1888), the construction of a traditional lineage
for the chakra system as used in modern occultism, and the abundant refer-
ence to “imaginary utopias” such as Egypt, India, Tibet and “primitive” soci­
eties of native Americans.25
    At the basis of Hammer’s analysis is a sharp distinction between emic
and etic historiography: the “accounts of believers” about the provenance of
their doctrines and rituals constitute emic historiography, and is contrasted
with the “secular studies” of professional, non-confessional historians.26
Recognizing the strong critical potential of this notion – something which
often tends to be downplayed even by some of the strictest historicists in the
field – Hammer makes sure to note that the emic and etic historiographies are
often in direct conflict, not only over emphasis and interpretation, but about
basic facts of history as well. The origin of Rosicrucianism may stand as a clear
example of this from the field of esotericism: in contemporary esoteric orders
which claim a Rosicrucian heritage, such as the Ancient Mystical Order Rosae
Crucis (AMORC) or the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, one typically


 23. See especially Lewis & Hammer, The Invention of Sacred Tradition, which explicitly forms
     an expansion of Hobsbawm and Ranger’s project – thematically to the field of religion, and
     historically beyond the modern period. Remarkably, it took 24 years for a volume of this
     kind to materialize.
 24. Hammer & Lewis, “Introduction”, 2–4.
 25. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 85–200.
 26. Ibid., 86.


                                                                                            31
egil asprem and kennet granholm



finds a literal belief that the Rosicrucian manifestos were in fact written by
a pre-existing secret society with roots in the Middle Ages or possibly even
further back.27 In etic scholarship, however, doubts that the Rosicrucian order
proclaimed by the manifestos was a fiction, which became a self-fulfilling
prophecy, have long since faded. Employing the distinction between emic and
etic historiography as a consistent and self-conscious methodological focus
when analysing tradition and its invention thus brings us close to one of Bruce
Lincoln’s critical theses on method: the history of religions is, or ought to be,
“a discourse that resists and reverses the orientation of that discourse with
which it concerns itself ”:

      To practice history of religions … is to insist on discussing the
      temporal, contextual, situated, interested, human, and material
      dimensions of those discourses, practices, and institutions that
      characteristically represent themselves as eternal, transcendent,
      spiritual, and divine.28

And, we might add, reversing the orientation of those discourses which claim
a revered and exalted “tradition” or “lineage”, by emphasizing their constructed
nature in temporal and material contexts.
   We hold that this implicitly critical edge of historical research ought to be
more explicitly recognized in studies of tradition in esotericism than has usu-
ally been the case. The recent proceedings of the inaugural conference of the
European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism (ESSWE), entitled
Constructing Tradition,29 may serve as an example. Despite its title, and with
a few notable exceptions,30 this volume focuses more on the internal (emic)
conceptualizations of tradition, their related philosophies, theologies and
mythologies, than on attempts to develop the critical analysis of appeals to
“tradition” in esotericism vis-à-vis etic historiography. It furthermore diverges
from the theme of “constructed traditions” by focusing also on actual practices
of transmission of knowledge and their material and social bases, as a part of
“tradition” in esoteric movements – hence, the precise analytic meaning of the
concept becomes blurred.31 Knowing more about the social and material basis
for actual transmissions of knowledge is obviously of value, but the continued
neglect of a clear critical stance to the invention of tradition is regrettable.
This point is all the more important as long as scholarly works that lack such


 27. See e.g. the analysis of “Rosicrucian” tradition-making in the Golden Dawn, in Asprem,
     Arguing with Angels, chapters 3 and 5.
 28. Lincoln, “Theses on Method”, 225 (emphasis added).
 29. Kilcher, Constructing Tradition.
 30. See especially the articles by Philipp Theisohn, Wouter Hanegraaff, Monika Neugebauer-
     Wölk, Henrik Bogdan, Kocku von Stuckrad and Christine Maillard.
 31. See e.g. Faivre, “Note sur la transmission”; cf. Kilcher, “Introduction”, xiv.


32
                                                                    constructing esotericisms



an explicit critical distance continue to be used by practitioners in attempts
at creating and legitimating tradition. In a later section, we will turn to some
more explicit and influential examples of this trend. First, however, we must
delve deeper into the role that various (emic) concepts of tradition have played
in the emergence of “esotericism”.


ANCIENT WISDOM NARRATIVES AND THE HISTORICAL
FORMATION OF “ESOTERICISM”