When considering conspiracy theory in and about esoteric groups and dis-
courses, questions of history, knowledge and agency are intertwined. Looking
now at the merits of viewing conspiracy theory as esoteric discourse, I shall
focus first on aspects of history and knowledge. Closing the discussion, I will
consider the relation between knowledge and agency. The topics remain inter-
twined: in order to realize freedom, conspiracy theories maintain, one has to
unveil hidden knowledge about secret plots and hidden power.
    The unveiling of conspiracy tends to take the form of a historical narrative.
The polemical content and narrative form serve conspiracy theories in their
function as mythologies of evil revealing secret knowledge about the origins
and nature of evils befalling humanity (and Nature). This goes especially for
the more complex and wide-ranging theories about grand, systemic (up to,
and including, cosmic) conspiracies we have looked at above. History gives
meaning and shape to revelations about the hidden forces around us, how
they have shaped past and current events, and where they are leading us.
    In order to fulfil the role as apokalypsis of evil’s roots and how its plan
unfolds, a conspiracy theory must reveal secret knowledge about places of
power. Besides, and allied with, the suspects in high finance, politics and the
military, the historical “secret societies” are presented by both some esoteri-
cists and conspiracy theorists as important loci of hidden traditions wielding
unknown power. This, as noted already by John Roberts,97 is interesting also
for its historic interrelation with older, self-mythologizing emic historiogra-
phies of esoteric societies. Two internally related elements seem important
here. The first is related to secrecy as the two-faced coin of esoteric discourse.
As discussed by Hugh Urban,98 the very claim of possessing secret knowledge
and hidden power may raise suspicion from outsiders. As Roberts noted for
early anti-Masonry, initiatory knowledge as revealed through levels of eso-
teric insight quickly raises suspicion that lower levels are left in the dark, or
actively misled. The second element is the esoteric discourse on “secret chiefs”
or “ascended masters” as hidden leaders with particularly deep insight and
power. Add the two, and we may see conspiracy theories involving secret
societies as the outline of an esoteric movement-discourse, appropriated,
filled in, and turned on its head: instead of guiding humanity in its progress,
the secret chiefs of conspiracy mislead, corrupt and destroy, and the secrecy
itself “proves” (as stated already in Roman conspiracy theories about early
Christians) that suspicions are true.
    Conspiratorial history may be seen as an inverted esoteric discourse on his-
tory, knowledge and agency. Alleged chains of transmission for the conspiracy


 97. John M. Roberts, The Mythology of the Secret Societies.
 98. See Chapter 9 of this volume.


220
                                                     hidden knowledge , hidden powers



are revealed, but the forebears of their own theories are often forgotten or
under-communicated. In these cases conspiracy theory reacts to, parallels
and partially inverts esoteric discourse in another manner as well: while par-
tially adopting the content and form of esoteric discourse, it reveals secrets
of history in order to remove secret power in the present. The soteriological
aspect of conspiracy theory is served by removing the alleged veil of secrecy
from esoteric knowledge, serving at the same time as “initiation” into this
knowledge.
    Conspiracy theories thus tend to reveal the least “ordinary”99 aspects of
occulture as destructive, while at the same time partaking in the same occul-
ture they reveal as evil: The construction of history as conspiracy often ends
up conflating other, equally marginalized competitors in occulture with a
“demonic” mainstream. By identifying them with a hidden establishment of
power, they are placed outside the subculture and made actors in a history
of power. These revelations are made in order to remove the power of evil,
but recalling Hammer’s injunction to look at esotericism as/in specific social
formations,100 we should also take note of the power constructed by these rev-
elations. In brief, the revelation of “secret knowledge” in conspiracy theory
serves to delimit in-group from out-group, aiming in the same stroke to work
as an “initiatory” experience regulating the possibility of salvation through
disclosure: adopt, and awaken, or reject, and join the black brethren (or the
sheeple).
    The unveiling of hidden truth is in both conspiracy theory and esoteric dis-
course, to paraphrase von Stuckrad,101 established contrary to the institution-
alized academic interpretations of history. Conspiracy theory tends, however,
to be characterized as “fundamentalist” rather than esoteric in its epistemolo-
gy.102 Indeed, it still holds true that conspiracy theories thrive in fundamen-
talist circles, and that they, as in several of the examples above, tend towards
literalism in interpretation. They also tend to use biblical lore literally and
have scant room for “higher criticism”. But also like fundamentalist discourse,
conspiracy discourse is more complex than etic simplification would have it.
Literalism is but one aspect even of fundamentalist epistemology, and like
modern prophecy literature, conspiracy theories go further in an “esoteric”
direction. Like prophetic literature, they show a marked tendency to “semiotic
arousal”103 where the visible becomes transparent signs evidencing the invis-
ible. Anything may become such a sign, and it is important to make note of
everything pointing in the right direction. It is an oft-noted observation that
conspiracy theories immunize themselves from critical inquiry (e.g. by the


 99.   See Chapter 6 of this volume.
100.   Hammer, “Esotericism in New Religious Movements”.
101.   Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.
102.   E.g. Coale, Paradigms of Paranoia, 4, 24.
103.   Landes, Millennialism.


                                                                                 221
asbjørn dyrendal



stratagem that evidence to the contrary is manufactured by the conspiracy).
Since evidence against any theory is rampant by reason of conspiracy and
cover-up, evidence for the conspiracy theory is necessarily always hidden. But
at the same time, conspiracy theory is driven by the narrative logic of suspense
fiction;104 the conspiracy must leave clues so that the detective may solve the
case. This makes culture into a “Book of Nature” whereby the signature of its
conspiratorial authors may be read.
    We get a hermeneutic where the discerning eye can reveal the plot. The
strategy may be simple inversions, as the “fact–fiction reversal” noted by
Michael Barkun,105 whereby precisely because something is marked as fiction,
it may be deemed legitimate to view it as masked fact. Other strategies are
more similar to the correspondences and analogies of traditional esoteric dis-
course. We have seen keys to interpretation ranging from Steiner’s esoteric
insight to revelations through secular “expertise” above.
    Taking this epistemology seriously, one is caught in a web of contradictions
and uncertainties: Nothing is certainly true, but anything might be true. This
opens connections between different areas of occulture: stigmatized knowl-
edge claims flow between different groups of interest, creating the improvised
apocalyptics of dark occulture where all manner of conspiratorial claims fit.
But it also opens up the arena for serious play with uncertainty: chaotic “onto-
logical guerrilla” activity, esoteric initiations and self-initiations into deeper
secrets of history, society, and self. We made note of the play with uncertainty
in Discordian use of conspiracy theory and some elements of it as well with
LaVey. In the other examples there were few real doubts and not much play.
The claims to knowledge may be shrouded in a very limited uncertainty, but
are nonetheless presented as fact.
    The style in conspiracy discourse tends, as in cult archaeology and other
types of alternative history, to appeal to the academic, and the prose may
be dense with references to “research”. It involves using phrases and terms
from both academic and “rejected” science. The effect is a variation of “ter-
minological scientism”.106 While many are explicitly “spiritual”,107 others adopt
topics, storylines, and modes of argument that strip away references to the
supernatural completely.108 But even the first category tends to adopt an at
least superficially secular rationality and a “scholarly” style that is completely
absent from Steiner’s explicit esoteric discourse, for example. An esotericist
like Steiner is closer to “conventionally” religious conspiracy writers,109 and
his revelations may be more easily recognizable as the spiritual gnosis of the


104.   See e.g. Wisnicki, Conspiracy, Revolution, and Terrorism.
105.   Barkun, A Culture of Conspiracy.
106.   Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 236–9.
107.   E.g. Icke, The Biggest Secret.
108.   E.g. Marrs, Rule by Secrecy.
109.   E.g. Des Griffin, Fourth Reich of the Rich.


222
                                                        hidden knowledge , hidden powers