Faivre has been criticized for selecting his criteria on an arbitrary basis.4
Kocku von Stuckrad says that Faivre also includes currents not fitting all his
characteristics, and excludes currents matching, but falling outside, his scope
of interest. He further claims that Faivre marginalizes Jewish, Muslim and
pagan identities, which all have influenced European esotericism, and con-
cludes that Faivre’s approach may be best suited to Christian esotericism in
the early modern period.5
   Wouter Hanegraaff has expanded on several perspectives on esotericism,
one of them being the historical definition. In his classic study of the New Age
movement Hanegraaff observed that there is a historical continuity between
Western esotericism and New Age, but that there is also a continually ongo-
ing process of reinterpretation.6 Ideas change according to the cultural con-
text in which they are located.7 While Western esotericism in the historical
sense is clearly based on pre-Enlightenment worldviews, Hanegraaff considers
the New Age movement to be a characteristically post-Enlightenment phe-
nomenon, which at the same time rejects and is influenced by Enlightenment
norms and values. Whenever New Age practitioners borrow “traditional”
esoteric concepts, they interpret them from a twentieth-century, secularized
perspective. Hanegraaff calls this tendency “the secularization of Western
esotericism”, and identifies five modern developmental traits that have been
of crucial importance for the emergence of New Age reinterpretations of the
esoteric: the emergence of occultism from the late eighteenth century, the
importance of Oriental influences, the impact of evolutionism, a trend towards
psychologization and (increasingly in the late twentieth century) the influence
of the market economy.8 These have all shaped the reception of historical eso-
tericism, according to Hanegraaff, and I will return to them later.
   A second usage of the concept of esotericism (usually without the “Western”
label) is typological, and is used to denote and analyse currents and religions
that have certain structural features in common. This kind of usage describes
esotericism in ahistorical and cross-cultural ways.9 It has often centred on the
etymological meaning of the word, with “eso” meaning “inner” as contrasted
with “exo” meaning “outer”. In this sense, “esoteric” implies teachings that are
intended for, or understood by, only a chosen few, for example an inner group



   4. Asprem, “På Epleslang i Kunnskapens Tre”, 11.
   5. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 83.
   6. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture. While “New Age” and “New Age move-
      ment” are problematic concepts, they will not be discussed here. For a further discussion,
      see e.g. Frisk, “Globalization”. The client cults at Hälsogränden, which are analysed below,
      could be classified as belonging to the New Age environment.
   7. Hanegraaff, “The New Age Movement and Western Esotericism”, 26.
   8. Ibid., 42–8.
   9. Asprem, “På Epleslang i Kunnskapens Tre”, 7–8.


374
                                                   a small - town health centre in sweden



of disciples or initiates.10 By contrast, many of the teachings traditionally
included in historical esotericism were never concealed in this sense.11
   Other typologies also exist. Besides his historically oriented work,
Hanegraaff has also elaborated on a typological model originally introduced
by Gilles Quispel. Here he distinguishes between three basic types of knowl-
edge, referred to as reason, faith and gnosis.12 This division is meant as an ana-
lytical tool that may help to distinguish different kinds of knowledge referred
to by both esotericists and non-esotericists. Mainstream Christianity, as rep-
resented by the established churches, could, according to Hanegraaff, be seen
as based for the most part on faith in divine revelation through scripture and/
or tradition. “Reason” is typified by the rational inquiry of ancient Greek phil­
osophy, culminating in an intellectual tradition which supported the emer-
gence of modern science. Lastly, “gnosis” is characterized by valuing special,
private experience (of God and the Self ), over and beyond reason and faith.13
While all three kinds can be found in Christian Churches, philosophy, science
and Western esotericism, the degree of emphasis on each type tends to dif-
fer between these systems. Thus gnosis, or the (claim to) direct apprehension
of ineffable metaphysical truth, is often preceded by philosophic teachings,
the truth of which first has to be understood by reason and then accepted
as true on the authority of the teacher. Hanegraaff says that special trance-
like “altered states of consciousness” could be involved, and calls for taking
the experiential dimension seriously.14 Meanwhile, nothing is said about the
content of such gnosis. He implies that the culture criticism of the New Age
movement is based on gnosis, which has been rejected as unacceptable from
the perspectives of faith and reason, and thus has become a reservoir for all
ideas being incompatible with the dominant trends of Western culture.15
   A third type of usage of the term “esotericism” is classified by Egil Asprem
as “discursive approaches”.16 While von Stuckrad has developed the most self-
consciously discursive approach to esotericism, discussed below, Hanegraaff
has lately developed a perspective that moves in this direction as well, claim-
ing that what we call esotericism today is the result of a specific polemical
discourse, spanning centuries of Western history. Esotericism, in this perspec-
tive, is an umbrella term for more or less all currents or phenomena which
have been seen as problematic (heretical, irrational, evil, ridiculous) from the


 10.   Hammer, “Esotericism in New Religious Movements”, 445–6.
 11.   Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 81.
 12.   Hanegraaff, “Reason, Faith, and Gnosis”, 138–41.
 13.   Hanegraaff, “The New Age Movement and Western Esotericism”, 40–41.
 14.   Hanegraaff, “Reason, Faith, and Gnosis”, 138–41.
 15.   Hanegraaff, “The New Age Movement and Western Esotericism”, 40–41.
 16.   Asprem, “På Epleslang i Kunnskapens Tre”, 8. Asprem also notes that several authors are
       somewhat ambivalent in their reliance on the three approaches, and that some have relied
       on different approaches at different times (Ibid., 13).


                                                                                          375
liselotte frisk



­ erspectives of established religion and science. The concept of esotericism,
p
while not necessarily picking out something tangible “out there”, has rather
come to comprise a large variety of such “negative others” internal to Western
culture.17 It has become a polemically construed waste-basket of “rejected
knowledge”.
   A different discursive approach has been proposed by von Stuckrad, who
wants to use “the esoteric” as a discourse analytical instrument, a model to
recognize and analyse esoteric discourses rather than focus strictly on a few
specific historical currents.18 Von Stuckrad wants to use the concept of the
esoteric to gain insights into the dynamics of Western history.19 He identifies
two dimensions of esoteric discourse: claims of higher knowledge and ways
of accessing this truth. What is more important than the content is the claim
to wisdom, or a vision of truth as a master key for answering all questions
of humankind. Esoteric claims are, according to von Stuckrad, absolutist, and
closely linked to a discourse of secrecy. Claims of this sort are present in many
kinds of religion and philosophy, but also in science.20 Although they can be
part of established and well-accepted cultural domains, they at times challenge
the truth claims of institutionalized religious traditions. As soon as a major-
ity is established, various deviant minorities enter the stage, both through
strategies of exclusion by the majority and through the conscious decision
of spokespersons to espouse alternative systems of meaning. The minority’s
claim to provide an individual way to true knowledge has further fuelled the
underlying conflicts. Further, von Stuckrad identifies two typical ways to gain
higher knowledge in esoteric discourse: mediation and individual experience.
The mediators – gods, angels, spirits, and so on – are also present in main-
stream Christianities, but their ability to provide deep metaphysical knowl-
edge to the individual is usually constrained by theology. Similarly, individual
experience as an important mode of gaining access to secret or higher knowl-
edge can also be a threat to institutionalized forms of religion.
   To these dimensions for gaining knowledge von Stuckrad adds certain
worldviews that are typically found in esoteric discourses. The prime exam-
ple is ontological monism – a necessary precondition for doctrines of cor-
respondences and magical rituals or ideas about living nature – although
esoteric discourses have often wrestled with the problem of dualism as well.
While those currents that are usually addressed as esoteric show all these
dimensions and worldviews, it is also possible to approach other currents or
phenomena with this model of interpretation.21 von Stuckrad also refers to the


 17. Ibid., 15–16.
 18. Ibid., 18.
 19. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 80.
 20. Cf. Chapter 11 of the present volume, where von Stuckrad analyses an esoteric dimension
     of modern life sciences.
 21. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88–93.


376
                                           a small - town health centre in sweden