We are an ancient people from an ancient civilization and we do
      not always use the ancient authority that melanin and our higher
      spiritual and mental status grants us. We are not humanistically on
      the same level as the Caucasian. We are biochemically and elec-
      tromagnetically superior to them. Therefore, we must examine the
      inferior Caucasian from the superior African status. It may take
      some getting used to, but we are the chosen race from the spirit
      world and the race blessed by the Sun. We must take our position
      of world leadership on this planet or have no planet because the
      Caucasians will destroy it. I beg of you, do not let the Caucasian
      junk food diet or diseases make you a prisoner in your own body.63

Melanin power is of course not available to white people, who at times are not
even seen as humans in this context. Welsing and other melanin theorists are
fond of interpreting human as “hue-man”, creating the impression that being
human is to be coloured. Bernard Ortez de Montellano gives an example of
this by using a quote from a speech delivered by the Afrocentric scholar Wade
Nobles,64 who said:

      CNS (central nervous system) plus EMS (essential melanic sys-
      tem) equals HB (human being). That the central nervous system
      combined with the essential melanic system is what makes you
      human. That in fact, to be human is to be black. To be human is to
      be black.65

The albino theory is not the only melanin-based theory of the difference
between whites and blacks. Another is the ice-man theory developed by the
white Canadian writer Michael Bradley in his 1991 book Iceman Inheritance.
Bradley claims that white people are more violent and aggressive because their
DNA contains elements of Neanderthal DNA, while black people are the only



 63. Afrika, Nutricide, xiii (emphasis original).
 64. Nobles is today professor emeritus in the Department of Africana Studies, the School of
     Ethnic Studies at San Francisco State University, and is the founder and Executive Director
     of the Institute for the Advanced Study of Black Family Life and Culture, Inc. in Oakland,
     California.
 65. De Montellano, “Melanin, Afrocentricity and Pseudoscience”, 51.


68
                                                                        inventing africa



pure humans.66 These ideas have been embraced by the Afrocentric scholar
Leonard Jeffries who divides the world into black “sun people” and white “ice-
men”.67 Richard M. Benjamin, a senior editor of The Journal of Blacks in Higher
Education, who followed Jeffries activities in his classroom, gave the following
recapitulation of the kind of ideas presented:

        “The ecology of the cave is different than the ecology of the riv-
        erbank.” Then a pause. “Cave vs. riverbank!” he (Jeffries) exclaims.
        People of European heritage acclimated themselves to caves and
        cold climates. Scavenging for food and resources to live on, they
        acquired their “dog-eat-dog values.” Sun people, by contrast, ben-
        efited from their warm ecology. “People who live on a ­riverbank
        with an abundance of coconuts become cooperative,” he says.68

Jeffries has been involved in several legal battles and has endangered his aca-
demic career due to his statements concerning white people and Jews. The lat-
ter, he claims, were responsible for the slave trade. Molefi Kete Asante, while
generally negative to overtly racist doctrines, has also looked favourably upon
the ice-man theory, though it is generally downplayed in his writings.69


GENERAL THEMES

Is it possible to see any general themes that can distinguish the form and role
esoteric ideas have taken in African American communities when compared
with other milieus? While there is a clear diversity, and we can see a shift of
focus from desires to imitate Europeans to an active identification as African
in the 1960s, we can also see that from the early stages of Prince Hall Masonry
there has existed a focus on moral and intellectual uplifting of the black peo-
ple. That there exists a moral and spiritual crisis that must be addressed has
been one of the most common themes and goals for black activists since the
1700s. From black Christian to black socialist movements, there is hardly any
group that has not focused especially on this. Ideas about the need for some
form of enlightened elite to lead the people are also common. What esoteric
orders like Masonry historically gave people was a system by which this could
be accomplished.
    Esoteric ideas are used in conjunction with a larger narrative explaining the
current situation for black people as being due to a lack of knowledge about
their glorious past, or, as in the case of melanin theories, the lack of knowledge

 66.   Howe, Afrocentrism, 207.
 67.   Ibid., 270; Binder, Contentious Curricula, 97.
 68.   Benjamin, “The Bizarre Classroom of Dr Leonard Jefferies”, 96.
 69.   Bradley, “Official Webpage”.


                                                                                     69
fredrik gregorius



of their potential for almost supernatural powers. In order to achieve change,
the mind needs to be liberated from the mental shackles that constrain it, and
black people need to be made aware of the structures that have kept them
down. One central aspect of this project is to rewrite history. In this discourse
it has been common to embrace conspiracy theories and ideas about a lost,
secret, and/or suppressed history.70 As we have seen with George James’s sem-
inal work, this project was sometimes based upon Masonic and Theosophical
ideas. We also find ideas about a form of wisdom that is the “true foundation”
of science and philosophy. While Asante claimed that there was a need for a
social evolution in order for Afrocentricity to be born, the general rhetoric is
based upon the idea of older and static wisdom. By understanding and adopt-
ing a new perspective based upon this knowledge the person is liberated from
intellectual and spiritual bondage. As we have seen, some writers have devel-
oped techniques to enhance the powers that could purportedly be awakened
by gaining knowledge. Regarding religion, we see attempts to create alterna-
tive spiritualities that are not based upon Christianity or Islam, but rather on
indigenous African traditions. God is often regarded as immanent, and the
human being thus has the potential to awaken the divine within him-/her-
self. All this is connected to larger political ambitions to change the circum-
stances for black people. As the sociologist Algernon Austin has argued, the
development towards self-improvement, though in a highly collective form,
can be seen as a means to continue after the decline of political radical groups
from the 1970s.71 This is also part of a broader shift of focus from political to
moral and personal issues that can be seen as a general trend of the 1980s and
1990s, with phenomena such as the self-help book Iron John72 and “New Age”
therapies being prime examples. Many Afrocentric writers are focused on the
importance of family and relationships and how to sustain them. Often we
find conservative and predominantly heteronormative views on marriage and
family.
   While Afrocentricity is still a living movement in the USA, the culturally
dominant role the movement had during the 1990s has declined. This has not
only to do with political and social developments, but can also be attributed to
Afrocentrists entering academia and establishing black studies programmes.
This made them the subject of academic critique, which has grown more
vocal over the years. The critique comes not only from scholars of African
and ancient history, but also from academics dealing with Afro-American
history and philosophy who feel that the Afrocentric paradigm is limit-
ing, unscientific, and based on untenable essentialist notions of culture and



 70. Such notions of history are far from uncommon in conspiracy theories generally. See
     Chapter 10 of this volume.
 71. Austin, Achieving Blackness, 130.
 72. Bly, Iron John.


70
                                                                     inventing africa



race.73 The Inclusion of black studies programmes, based on Afrocentric ideas,
have also many times proved to be pyrrhic victories as the inclusions often
were nothing more than symbolic.74 What role they will play in the future is
thus difficult to predict. Changing political circumstances might well prepare
the way for a revival of Afrocentricity, but what form it will take is an open
issue. Judging from the writings produced today, spirituality will continue to
play a central role, even if the harsh critique of religions such as Christianity
and Islam is being downplayed to further interreligious cooperation.




 73. See for example Austin, Achieving Blackness; Appiah, “Europe Upside Down”; Moses,
     Afrotopia; Gilroy, The Black Atlantic.
 74. Binder, Contentious Curricula, 13–15.


                                                                                   71
chapter 4

SECRET LINEAGES AND DE FACTO SATANISTS
ANTON LAVEY’S USE OF ESOTERIC TRADITION

Per Faxneld