The [first] war made me a true Muslim. We are all born muslim.
     You and I come into the world as children of the Almighty. But we
     can’t find the right path from the start, we stumble, we struggle
     to find our way. Our leaders, our fathers, our religious guides and
     commanders stray. They often lead us astray in good faith. I too
     strayed for many years. My standards and values were false. During
     the last war I still fought under the banner “Liberty or death.”
     Today, I also fight for my faith. I saw that the things in which I had
     believed are perishable illusions and that the only eternal value
     is faith in the Almighty, and only faith offers hope and peace. I
     didn’t reach this conclusion in a day and a night. It ripened. Five
     years ago, when Russia attacked us, the Western world – guard-
     ian of all those sacred values like equality, freedom, justice, broth-
     erhood and civil rights – turned away from Chechnya. The West
     betrayed us like a whore who goes with the highest bidder. This
     taught us, Chechens, a lot. We saw the untruthfulness of our own
     masters. We began to see that we could only count on ourselves
     and the mercy of Allah. That gave us immense strength. … Today,
     we’re approaching the war with Russia as completely different peo-
     ple. We are not just fighting for freedom, but also for the faith. Not
     only my Mujahidin, almost all Chechens turned to the Qur’an for
     answers on how to live. … Many among us would like to introduce
     the Divine order overnight, because they don’t understand that the
     people aren’t ready for that. By the way, not just the people. Often
     those who are contemplating this haven’t a clue about the Qur’an
     themselves, although they are convinced that they are in posses-
     sion of the truth. As to me: I’m an enemy of both militant god-
     lessness and militant ignorance. … We all die once. The Almighty
     made us that way. The choice He gave us is not when we die, but
     how. We die when He wills it and there is nothing we can do about
     that, even if we hid in stone towers. The only choice is how we die.
     I have chosen to die as a warrior. What’s so extremist about that?45

45. Jagielski, Torens van Steen, 265–6 (my translation).

                                                                                      275
eduard ten houten



Recorded in a country thousands of miles from Brazil, Coelho’s country of
birth, and distant not just geographically but also culturally, and years before
Basayev could possibly have known the Manual, the sentiments, tenden-
cies and vital philosophy his words express contain practically everything
needed to begin to conclude the comparison between him and Coelho.
Though not the most striking feature, his use of the first person plural is
the most important. The man who spoke here spoke for himself as a human
being and a Muslim, but he spoke first and foremost as a Chechen and in
the name of the Chechens. This clear self-identification as a Chechen and as
a Muslim not only influenced his reading of the Manual as much as it would
have had he lived an average Western middle-class existence in which he
felt trapped, but also led him to Chechenize and Islamize Coelho’s Warrior.
In doing so – and nothing in the Manual forbids him to identify himself or
the Warrior as a Chechen Muslim, or to follow his dream of liberating the
Chechens from Russia – the text acquires a wholly new urgency. It acquires
weight. Words such as freedom and oppression, hitherto suspended in the
near-vacuum of Coelho’s rather amorphous warrior archetype, suddenly
mean something when the qualifier Chechen is added. They suddenly refer
to the Chechen people’s lack of independence and unchecked Russian bru-
tality against Chechnya’s civilian population. The crucial difference between
Coelho’s New Age Warrior and Basayev’s Chechen Mujahid is in fact to
be found in this Chechen, that is communal or social aspect of Basayev’s
struggle.
    Although Coelho legitimizes the non-committal self-­interestedness of the
Warrior by proclaiming that each of us ought to fulfil solely our own uniquely
important destiny, it remains that in the Manual’s world the Warrior has no
next of kin, no roots, no motherland or fatherland, no nationality, no reli-
gion, no ethnicity, no community function, no social responsibilities, nor
even enduring social relations. To put it differently, the Warrior has nothing
concrete for which to fight and no one with whom to fight. The Warrior, it is
implied, rejects all such ties when he sets out on his Path towards his elusive
dream. But in Basayev’s case precisely his culture, his sense of kinship, rooted-
ness, and community (as well as a fair dose of Chechen adventurism) had sent
him on his collision course with Russian power in 1991.
    Something else Basayev could little appreciate was that, unlike a mujahid
with his need to act in accordance with the Qur’an and the Sharia, Coelho’s
Warrior has only a few communicable directions to abide by and is in princi-
ple not bound by anything except God’s voice speaking infallibly to him in the
silence of his heart. That is to say, even though Coelho clearly showed himself
to be a believer, his Warrior fights in the path of God without any authorita-
tive written spiritual guidance. Another disagreeable aspect must have been
that, despite references to oppression and injustice, no attempt is made at a
definition or delimitation of the Warrior’s dream and, perhaps most impor-
tantly, his enemy is never identified. Within the world of the Manual of the

276
                                                       new age spirituality and islamic jihad



Warrior of Light neither can actually be imparted since the Warrior is “free to
choose his desires” and even “chooses his enemies”.46
   While he must have picked up on Coelho’s civilian side, Basayev chose to
ignore it. He could even keep bits of passages which reveal the Warrior as the
type of non-committal nonconformist who heeds no dogma and does what
he wants regardless of other people’s opinions.47 He could also keep intact
many segments that ring hollow when applied to civilian Warriors; having lost
countless of his comrades in combat, for instance, Basayev had no problem
being grateful to them “for their blood mingled with his on the battlefield”.48
   Because he grew up in a clannish, communal society that had inculcated
him with a fighting ethos; because he was brought up in a culture of strong
ancestor veneration; because his father had raised him and his brother on
the tales of his ancestors, most of whom, according to Basayev family lore,
had been “fighters, protecting their homeland against invaders” since at least
the fourteenth century;49 because Chechen cultural memory is filled with
centuries of violent conflict with the Russians from Tsarist times onward;
because his namesake was Imam Shamil, the great Caucasian leader of the
long ­nineteenth-century war against the Russian Empire whose headquar-
ters were near his birthplace; because his ancestors, most of whom, according
to Basayev family lore, had been “fighters, protecting their homeland against
invaders” from Tamerlane and General Yermolov to the Bolsheviks, since at
least the fourteenth century;50 because in light of all of this Basayev could con-
vincingly claim that he and his Chechen comrades “have taken this baton from
our forefathers, and this struggle has continued for centuries”,51 he had no dif-
ficulty in keeping a section such as this almost intact:

       Every blow of his sword                       His every blow against the
       carries with it centuries of                  enemy carries with it centuries
       wisdom and meditation.                        of wisdom and reflection.

 46. mc, 5, 29; bk, 19; kc, 18, 33. Though this essay is not the place to discuss it, there is a strong
     case to be made for the idea that we never get to see and meet the Warrior’s enemy face to
     face because, for Coelho, the enemy is precisely that which was so important for Basayev,
     namely rootedness in custom and tradition, i.e. having limitations (in Basayev’s case: his
     being a Chechen). For Coelho, the social sphere itself, in its limiting entirety, seems to be
     the enemy. This could, I think, partly explain why Coelho’s “message” resonates across cul-
     tures and creeds. It is not because it transcends and/or affirms them all, i.e. because it con-
     tains a positive universal element, but precisely because it opposes and rejects each culture
     and each creed as limiting. Its appeal is global not because he has found the words to speak
     something substantial that inheres within each, but because it is universally attractive to
     escape from limits set by culture and creed – and history.
 47. See e.g. mc, 131; bk, 29; kc, 102.
 48. mc, 3; bk, 1; kc, 17.
 49. Gall & de Waal, Chechnya, 261.
 50. Ibid.
 51. Anon., “No-one Can Prevent Me from Doing what God Permits Me to Do”.


                                                                                                  277
eduard ten houten