respectively.24 Whether or not a producer of popular culture has “authentic
esoteric sentiments” is, however, largely irrelevant; the audience may still find
inspiration in the material, which can have a causal influence on the devel-
opment of ideas, mythologies and practices. Furthermore, the increased use
of esoteric themes and elements in popular cultural products suggests an
increased general interest in the esoteric. By placing the focus on communica-
tion rather than on “intent” one avoids problematic issues such as this.
    The popularization of the esoteric is at the centre of Chapter 6 of this vol-
ume. Here, Christopher Partridge elaborates on the concept of “occulture”,
first introduced in his two-volume The Re-enchantment of the West (2004/5).
While building on Colin Campbell’s notion of “the cultic milieu”, as well as
later discussions on the theme by scholars such as Jeffrey Kaplan and Heléne
Lööw, Partridge is critical of the focus on deviance and marginality that has
been inherent in this concept. Instead, as the title of Partridge’s contribution
suggests, “Occulture is Ordinary”. The author links this idea to late modern
societal changes, such as “the turn to the self ” and the rise of “post-material
values”, and details how this all supports the popularization, as well as the
increased respectability, of the esoteric. Popular culture plays a central role
here, as occulture functions as “a reservoir that is constantly feeding and being
fed by popular culture”. Thus, the study of the esoteric in the contemporary
world must take into account popular culture, just as the study of contem-
porary religious change must take into account both the esoteric and pop-
ular culture. Occulture is, as Partridge suggests, fast becoming the primary
mode of religiosity in the “post-Christian West”. Ending his chapter with a case
study of musician, artist and magician Genesis P-Orridge – who first coined
the term “occulture” – Partridge comments on an intriguing feature of the
occulture as such: the sites of production and networks of distribution are
organized in such a way as to give otherwise “marginal” subcultural figures an
unprecedented influence on culture more broadly.
    As for the other (but connected) main theme of Part II – new media –
it is useful to discuss the concept of mediatization. This concept, which has
become central to the study of religion and media in recent years, relates to
“the process through which core elements of a social or cultural activity …
assume media form”.25 This means that “the activity is, to a greater or lesser
degree, performed through interaction with a medium, and the symbolic
content and the structure of the social and cultural activity are influenced
by media environments and media logic, upon which they gradually become
more dependent”.26 Scholars have distinguished “strong” (or direct) from
“weak” (or indirect) mediatization, with the former referring to a ­situation

 24. Faivre, “Borrowings and Misreadings”, 44–53. This article was part of a special issue of
     Aries on “Esotericism and Fiction” (vol. 7.1, 2007).
 25. Hjarvard, “The Mediatization of Religion”, 13.
 26. Ibid., 13.


                                                                                          11
egil asprem and kennet granholm



where a social or cultural activity becomes so bound to media that it can-
not be performed outside of this realm, and the latter to a situation where
the activity is not necessarily bound to media but still strongly influenced by
it.27 An example of direct mediatization in the esoteric milieu is online ini-
tiations, where an initiate must access the Internet in order to perform the
activity. As for indirect mediatization, an example is situations where interpre-
tations of specific esoteric activities are essentially bound in popular cultural
readings. While theories of mediatization contain problems, such as the com-
mon sociological overemphasis on the novelty of certain phenomena and pro­
cesses, they correctly point to the need for new perspectives and approaches
in studying religion in the information age. This issue is addressed in the next
two chapters of the section.
    In “From Book to Bit”, Jesper Aagaard Petersen (Chapter 7) looks at the
use of computer-relayed communication technology in the Satanic milieu, and
demonstrates how one finds both continuity and innovation with regard to
“offline” communication practices. Internet-based communication is in many
ways a continuation of earlier esoteric networks in the forms of “books and
periodicals … suggested reading lists of occult groups; word-of-mouth and
bulletin boards in occult shops; seminars, concerts, and fairs; and classified
ads in magazines and newspapers”. However, it also brings into play factors
that are novel, such as the potential to reach larger, transnational (or translo-
cal), audiences, as well as providing potential for new forms and functions of
interaction. A major point for the scholar is the potential of online research
to provide access to “the previously hard-to-get and difficult-to-see” in ways
never before encountered. After all, online communication and network-
ing leave traces of a wholly different order than offline activities do. Petersen
highlights the necessity to develop new methodology and approaches when
it comes to doing online research on these emerging sources. One of the ave-
nues explored is a quantitative approach to online research, where examin-
ing the relative popularity of specific groups and tracing connections between
distinct groups is made easier using Internet traffic tracking tools. In a more
qualitative approach, Petersen also suggests that instead of simply looking at
individual representations, researching online discussion forums provides the
possibility to examine interaction in a new way, making it possible to look at
how authority negotiations function both in real time and over an extended
period.
    Chapter 8 continues the discussion of new media and Internet-based com-
munication technologies, but here John L. Crow ventures in a direction dif-
ferent from Petersen’s. Starting with a historical look at the occult notion of
the “astral plane”, Crow moves to discuss emerging practices of “Accessing
the Astral with a Monitor and a Mouse”. In doing this, a qualitative method


 27. See Hjarvard, “From Bricks to Bytes”, 48–9.


12
                                                                    introduction



along the lines of “virtual anthropology” is explored. Religion is furiously
present online, and, as several scholars have noted, esotericists – particularly
neo­pagans – “are more active on the Internet than any other religious group”.
Not only does online communication provide the possibility for transnational
community, the development and great evolution of online virtual environ-
ments in recent times provides the possibility to recast older esoteric notions
in new ways. We can observe the creation of cybercovens, but also the meet-
ing of practitioners in virtual worlds such as Second Life. Here, many prac-
titioners have come to describe the cyber realm as analogous to the astral
plane, and some even recast their computers as sacred magical objects – with
a guaranteed place on their physical altars. We can also see a convergence
where vocabulary from the computer world is transposed to the magical, and
computer programming comes to be regarded as a magical activity in itself.
There is an obvious generational shift here, with younger, computer-literate
generations increasingly diverging from older generations of occultists in their
approach to magical realities.
    Continuing the discussion of the impact of new media, Hugh B. Urban
looks at “The Secrets of Scientology” (Chapter 9). Urban has previously
made important contributions to the understanding of esotericism in terms
of secrecy, particularly from a sociological perspective. In his chapter, Urban
extends such analyses by taking a close look at secrecy, information control,
and their wider context in social and political struggles for power, in and sur-
rounding the Church of Scientology. In a sociologically informed historical
overview, Urban shows how the new forms of communication associated with
the Internet has influenced the practice of secrecy in Scientology, particularly
complicating its enforcements of information control. Analysing Scientology
from the 1950s to the 1980s as a “Cold War religion”, preoccupied with, and
implicated in, the anxieties and paranoias concerning security, surveillance,
and politically motivated deception that characterized the era, Urban pays
attention to the espionage war which erupted between the Church and var-
ious US government agencies, including the FBI. In contemporary times
Scientology has been involved in information wars and attempts at conceal-
ment and surveillance on the web, getting increasingly complicated and dif-
ficult for the secretive organization in the time of whistle-blowing websites
such as Wikileaks and “hacktivist” groups such as Anonymous. Considering
these material settings together with the secretive organizational and doctri-
nal profile of the movement, Urban suggests that the case of Scientology gives
us profound insights not just into a controversial new religion but also into
questions of religious secrecy and concealment in general. Scientology illus-
trates that religious secrecy is rarely simply a matter of esoteric gnosis trans-
mitted through isolated groups of initiates far removed from messy social and
political contingencies. It is, on the contrary, very often intimately entwined
with larger cultural and historical forces, struggles over power, and concrete
material interests. Above all, argues Urban, the case of Scientology highlights

                                                                              13
egil asprem and kennet granholm