74. mc, 125; bk, 2; kc, 98.
 75. It is superfluous to note that what Coelho is doing here and throughout the Manual is pro-
     mote his belief in everyday magic.
 76. Qur’an 8: 64–6.


284
                                                 new age spirituality and islamic jihad



– a list that includes General Augusto Pinochet, Russian President Vladimir
Putin and Viktor Bout – and left it at that.77
   But Basayev saw something in it that led him to improve on it and lend his
name to it. And this leaves us with two guides to holy war written by two men
whose public images could hardly be more opposed. Coelho was designated
by the UN as a Messenger of Peace in 2007 and Basayev, by the same organi-
zation, designated an associate of Al-Qaeda in 2003. Coelho has never seen
a day of real-life combat in his life and Basayev spent much of his adult life
leading forces into battle. Placed side by side, they state in the starkest pos-
sible terms the problem of how to harmonize the gristle and grime of earthly
war with the ethereal eternity of the divine Light. Can you truly consider your-
self to be a Warrior of Light if you have never considered the use of a grenade
launcher? Is a headshot execution of a captured enemy ever not an atheistic
act? What is better: to die or to kill for what you believe in? Or is just struggling
to experience great feelings the best solution? This problem is further compli-
cated by the fact that Coelho is usually judged on his intentions and spiritual
message, and Basayev on the concrete results and outcome of his actions. As
we have seen, however, the distinction between the spiritual – about which we
can speak only in terms transported by means of metaphor from the concrete
so as to delimit and freeze it – and the concrete – about which we so often
speak in terms transported by means of metaphor from the spiritual so as to
animate and inspire it – has already been broken down.
   Due to this, Basayev could approach Coelho and drag his Warrior down
from the skies. In this respect, the Manual’s main weakness as a handbook
for religious warriors was to his advantage. Had Coelho decided to offer posi-
tive, normative guidance on what is and what is not permissible to fight for, he
would presumably have stuck to civilian, non-military dreams. But the book
that is key to understanding Coelho’s world, is founded on a faux ideology of
negative freedom; the Warrior’s dream appears to be nothing more and noth-
ing less than to live in total freedom from all earthly, ethical, conventional,
cultural and social constraints, all the while feeling that God is blessing you as
you go along.
   As a manual for the warrior without a cause, as a vacancy brimming with
warrior spirit, however, it provided Basayev with the good, hard, lean bat-
tlefield liberation theology he needed but had no time to develop himself
because he had a war to conduct. All that Coelho’s religious fervour needed
to give it direction and force was the temperance of a clear traditional mould.
And once cast into the firm mould of Islamic jihad, Coelho’s ideas were put to
the test. His warrior attitude crystallized into military action. Suddenly inspi-
ration drawn from wars fought in the days of the blade gushed back into the


 77. Morais, A Warrior’s Life, 413–14; Anon, “Putin Meets with Famous Brazilian Writer Paulo
     Coelho”.


                                                                                       285
eduard ten houten



real world of blood-splattered snow, muddy boots, mutilated corpses, AK-47s
and the charred ruins where houses once stood.
   What followed the publication of the Manual of the Mujahid, finally, mag-
nified Coelho’s militant streak into shrill visibility. When Basayev revised the
Manual, his bloodiest terrorist operation still lay six months in the future.
On the morning of 1 September 2004, thirteen years to the day after he first
held an assault rifle, a suicide squad of heavily armed mujahidin forced over
1100 children, parents and teachers into a school gymnasium in Beslan, North
Ossetia, executed a dozen and a half or so of the strongest-looking adult male
hostages, and demanded that the Russian army retreat from Chechen territory
immediately. A few days later Russian troops, using excessive force, stormed
the building in a badly controlled effort to end the stand-off. Many hundreds
were wounded in the fighting and around 330 people lost their lives, includ-
ing 186 children, scores of whom were crushed and burnt when the roof of the
gymnasium caught fire and collapsed.78
   To say that this operation in no way pertains to Paulo Coelho is not a cir-
cuitous way of stating that he is not responsible for any of Basayev’s actions.
It does not pertain to him because, as we have repeatedly seen, it is intrinsic
to his “message” to refuse giving prescriptions or concrete advice on how to
achieve a certain goal or how to decide upon a goal. Coelho is a partisan of a
party of one. Therefore the Beslan attack pertains in no way to Coelho.
   But it does pertain to the Warrior of Light. He lives according to the same
divine para-ethics that led Basayev to say in connection with Beslan that, “No
one can forbid me, while there is a war going on – I stress, while there is a war
going on – from doing what God permits me to do.”79 But he will never be able
to fight like Basayev: concretely, violently, cruelly and, above all else, socially.
As much as he recognized the aggressively uncompromising and contrarian
impetus of the Manual as his own, Basayev did not share the expansive sol-
ipsism of the Warrior and his prophet. He lived and died for the righteous
community he was part of and which he believed in. “I am fighting not for my
personal enrichment or still more my personal pleasure”, he said in 2005. “I am
fighting for my freedom and for the freedom of my people, to free ourselves
once and for all from Russian oppression.”80 Only because he was a genuine
partisan, only because he identified the enemy and himself (and simultane-
ously transformed the Warrior of Light into a Chechen mujahid), did he avoid
the dirty little secret at the heart of Coelho’s philosophy: the idea that I am
only responsible for and answerable to myself, that I am the prophet of my life.


 78. John Dunlop’s reconstruction of events is very useful in showing that the above summary is
     more than a little simplistic; see Dunlop, “Beslan”; cf. Dunlop, “The September 2004 Beslan
     Terrorist Incident”.
 79. Anon., “No-one Can Prevent Me from Doing what God Permits Me to Do”.
 80. Anon., “Interview of Shamil Basayev to Channel 4 News”.



286
chapter 14

DEEP ECOLOGY AND THE STUDY
OF WESTERN ESOTERICISM
Joseph Christian Greer




Deep Ecology’s most enduring problem outside of the planetary ecological
situation itself concerns its definition. In short, the multiplicity of competing
interpretations of Deep Ecology has manifested a crippling amount of philo-
sophical infighting, while at the same time providing its critics with the evi-
dence needed to claim that the eco-philosophy is incoherent. Moreover, the
dizzying array of interpretations has led astray scholars looking to account for
Deep Ecology within overarching thematic rubrics like religion or esotericism.
Scholars looking to place Deep Ecology within larger analytic categories more
often than not fail to recognize the polyvalence of the term, and, thus, their
usage of it is often superficial or distorted.1 The intention of this chapter is not
to solve this identity crisis; on the contrary, instead of validating any one inter-
pretation of Deep Ecology, focus will be placed on unpacking the three most
prominent interpretations of the eco-philosophy. In surveying these contents
it shall become clear that, far from being a singular ideology, Deep Ecology
is a hotly debated discursive field, and as such, lacks an essence beyond the
assertions, polemics, practices and identities that compose it. That said, the
analytic construct of “esotericism” shall orient the foregoing analysis for the
simple reason that the three main interpretations of Deep Ecology all claim
access to higher knowledge, despite their differences. As a point of orienta-
tion, the esoteric truth claims of each definition will be analysed in a ­manner


   1. In his otherwise excellent two-volume work The Re-enchantment of the West, Christopher
      Partridge includes Deep Ecology within his “occulture” construct, describing the former
      as a singular orthodoxy that is composed of “the belief that all forms of life have intrinsic
      value, moral worth, and the right to ‘self-realize’”. As will be shown, two of the three most
      prominent interpretations of Deep Ecology regard it as neither a singular orthodoxy, nor
      directly linked to the “self-realization” ideal. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West,
      vol. 2, 58.



                                                                                              287
joseph christian greer