Hence we can follow the discursive construction of conceptual meaning
and online community through individual posts and threads. Core members
are articulating one discourse and marginalizing others, so that some posts
have more meaning than others even though there are several interpretations
present within one thread. This is in fact a virtual community with an inside
and an outside. This becomes evident about a year later when the hegemonic
interpretation of rituals is challenged by “Satani”, who writes:

      It is different how one has one’s rituals, some has them to prove to
      themselves that they are worth more and actually mean ­something.
      I hold (perform) rituals to support my faith, not to prove anything.
      I believe in myself and really don’t care what everybody else is say-
      ing and think of me. I trust only myself and my god satan. I am
      the inverse of what the Christians. A real God fulfils one’s wishes,
      that never happened when I was a Christian, never. I know that the
      Christian’s God take care of light and dry weather. In that case I do
      the opposite. I listen to satan. Have been to some ritual meetings,
      one feels valuable and is a servant of Satan. Sometimes I lie outside
      at midnight, full moon and rain. And feel satan’s power. He is the
      one that is the creator, him that should be respected. Does some-
      one have other rituals? – I would like very much to hear about it.57

This post is different from the previous ones both in form and content. To
take the last aspect first, Satani is more in sync with the spirit of Sp34k’s initial
inquiry than Amina or Wolf. The post provides answers to both what rituals
are performed and what strength or power one gains from it. This is an inter-
pretation of rituals that is radically different from Amina and Wolf ’s, whose
understanding corresponds to the official, rationalist and psychologizing dis-
course of Satanisk Forum as articulated through the FAQ, the official maga-
zine, and so on. Satani, on the other hand, is referring explicitly to Christianity
in an anti-Christian, theistic and deeply metaphysical discourse; rituals work
because God and Satan exist – God provides us with light and dry weather,
Satan fulfils one’s wishes. Formally, the post has traits of both speech and text,
although the oral and immediate nature is predominant. This is expressed in
amplifying adverbs, repetitions, syntax and spelling, the absent subject in sev-
eral sentences, and finally the double question in the end. The text-oriented
and mediate can be seen in the overall coherence and flow of the post.
   Satani does not stand a chance. On the same day Wolf quotes the pas-
sage about light and dry weather, and dryly remarks that the answer to that
rather should be found in meteorology,58 while Amina the next day asks where


 57. SFO, “Ritual=Styrke”, posted 18 November 2006. This post has so many errors I have omit-
     ted the use of [sic]; thus all errors in the translation are intentional.
 58. Ibid.

                                                                                        155
jesper aagaard petersen



Satani gets his ideas from, as “your description of your faith on the face of it
seems very different than what most other Satanists express”.59 Even though
Satani dutifully answers that the meetings take place in cemeteries at mid-
night with “a lot of Satanists” and are called “The Holy Sign”, and that we can
read about them “in the Satanic books”,60 Amina is not convinced. She effec-
tively ends the “discussion” by first referring to “the many books and articles I
have read together with about ten years in the milieu”, and secondly through
a total deconstruction of Satani’s post by embedding it in an academic dis-
course – she demands explicit references and calls his interpretation of rituals
“ostensive acting”, an emulation of popular Western demonology by living out
a mythical frame. Satani has not written a post since.
    In conclusion, the thread as a whole is also an example of a hybrid text. We
can see that there is a hegemonic discourse of ritual, but that it has to be artic-
ulated, indeed activated and reconstructed constantly. In this case powerful
resources like brutal moderation or banning does not appear, but it is obvious
that there are more open and more closed posts which in themselves are play-
ing up against group values as formulated in other threads, in the FAQ and on
the group’s website. Sp34k ends on the inside of this community while Satani
ends on the outside, and it is to a large degree a matter of “walking the walk
and talking the talk” (or perhaps “when in Rome …”). Perhaps Sp34k cannot
write in another way, but through the oral codes and traits his inquiry exhibits
an imprint of genuine interest in knowledge as well as community. Amina and
Wolf are accommodating and enter into cautious dialogue with him, whereas
they cut off Satani completely because he challenges the boundaries of the
established discourse.
    There are many paths to follow from this example. One course is to focus
on how socialization works as a unification or regimentation under the hege-
monic discourse of Satanism on the site. Substantially, contributors have to
read the FAQ before posting;61 formally, they have to conform to certain sty-
listic rules (understood both orthographically and rhetorically).62 Posters such
as Sp34k and “The ONE” are examples of users who are socialized successfully
– they write a large number of posts and adopt Amina’s, Wolf ’s and, therefore,
Satanisk Forum’s discourse – while Satani and Woland are users who, though
expressing very different interpretations of Satanism and huge differences in
communicative skill, nevertheless are not successfully socialized; they write
a small number of posts and disappear rather than adopting anything. Two
other interesting types are exemplified by “Einstürzende”, who produces a lot,


 59. Ibid., posted 19 November 2006.
 60. Ibid.
 61. This is a classic response to many inquiries especially from pupils and students. See e.g.
     SFO, “Hvad Indenbære Satanismen …”.
 62. See Wolf ’s posts: Wolf, “Nye retningslinjer”; Wolf, “Danskproblemer”, both posted as mod-
     erator of the board.


156
                                                                        from book to bit



but does not adopt the discourse (but his posts gradually become friendlier
towards Amina and Wolf; they simply avoid contentious issues), and “Serdan”
and “Ko18”, who post a lot of mainly divisive writings and are eventually
banned by the moderator (Wolf ).63 On a formal level, contributors who are
inside the virtual community become more text-oriented, even though liter-
acy is not a guarantee of affiliation. Nevertheless, when compared with other
forums there seems to be an overabundance of academics, and thus a clear
tendency towards intellectualization and an academic orthographical norm,
and this is of course related to such offline contexts as the membership base of
the parent body and the extant values there.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

The hybrid texts of a discussion forum can be utilized to isolate and analyse
themes (as “ordinary” texts), but they are even more useful when used to take
a closer look at the creation of discourse, closure and conflict. The virtual
community is both creator of the text and created with it, because the text
contains both the pros and contras to the discourse itself. This presents the
opportunity to track both the formal and substantial constitutive traits of the
interpretative practice inherent in the hybrid text. We can look at the “careers”
of individual debaters in a formal and/or substantial sense, take a closer look
at thematic leitmotif, or stratify the nuances between the different articula-
tions and degrees of engagement, status and activity.
    Hence I agree with Mark MacWilliams that virtual communities are at
least “symbolically real heteroglossic spaces”, constituting a “diverse mixture
of voices” that creates places in which to include or exclude others.64 Naturally,
not all communication, nor communication in itself, creates community, but
it is difficult to imagine a community both off- and online without communi-
cation.65 In a sense, the tool and the place align themselves. As a consequence,
I have focused on the meso-level of discourse, a middle-ground between actor
and structure and thus an entity that can be found both in the singular utter-
ance, expression, or text, as well as between utterances without being above
them. The concept of “discourse” marks an attention towards exactly the con-
structive and dialectical aspects, that is an integration of the structurally con-
ditioned (“what”) and the conditioning in practice (“how”).
    Sociologically, the use of new media entails new opportunities for trans-
formation and interaction, but also old problems. Satanisk Forum and
the Church of Satan are not that far apart in organizational ethos oriented

 63. For a discussion of similar dynamics on Baha’i message boards see e.g. Piff & Warburg,
     “Seeking for Truth”.
 64. MacWilliams, “Digital Waco”, 180–82.
 65. Foster, “Community and Identity”, 24, 30.


                                                                                      157
jesper aagaard petersen