6. Coelho’s inclusion in the New Age galaxy may not be immediately apparent. Popular media
      call him an “inspirational” or “spiritual” author as often as a “New Age” one. So far no seri-
      ous critical effort has been made to distil a consistent religious worldview and cosmology
      from his books and the statements he makes online and through other media. Any such
      effort would be hampered by the fact that he is first and foremost a fiction writer. As such,
      according to common twentieth-century practice, he cannot be held responsible for what
      his characters do, say, see, think or experience. This applies even if, as is often the case, the
      words of wisdom which they speak or think are literally identical to what Coelho offers else-
      where as his own convictions and views (and even if one considers that voices of “dissent”
      are rarely, if ever, present in Coelho’s books). That said, the epilogue of his non-fictional The
      Valkyries contains explicit statements of his belief that the time of great transformations,
      personal and universal, has come. Writing in early 1992, he regarded the end of the Cold
      War as the beginning of another, simultaneously more violent and more spiritual æon.
   7. Apart from those referred to below, notable English-language books on the Russian–
      Chechen wars include Baiev, The Oath; Hughes, Chechnya; Sakwa, Chechnya; Tishkov,
      Chechnya.


                                                                                                  267
eduard ten houten



   To facilitate further comparison between Basayev’s original Kniga Mudz­
hakhida (kb) and Coelho’s Manual of the Warrior of Light (mc), I have added
references to Kniga Voina Sveta (kc), the 2002 Russian translation of the latter.
All passages are cross-referenced, except of course if Basayev deleted some-
thing. Also, because there is no paginated print edition of the Manual of the
Mujahid, references to it are to chapters, not page numbers.


PAULO COELHO, THE WARRIOR OF LIGHT AND SHAMIL BASAYEV

The notion of the Warrior of Light has been central to Coelho’s spiritual
­arsenal from the beginning. It is mentioned in The Alchemist (1988), as well
 as in The Pilgrimage (1987) and The Valkyries (1992), two early books which,
 though they contain fictionalized elements, aspire to the autobiographical. Its
 importance is actually such that Coelho regards the Manual of the Warrior
 of Light (1997) as the “key book” to understanding “above all [his] ideological
 world”; in fact, as having “the same importance for him as the Red Book had
 for Mao or the Green Book for Gaddafi”.8 Warriors of the Light, he has said, are
 the “spiritual adventurers” of this world, those who actively try to realize their
 dream, regardless of what obstacles are placed in their way.9 Fighting to the
end for what they believe in, they know that winning or losing “doesn’t matter,
what counts is the struggle to bring something about”.10
    Structurally, the Manual is framed by a tale about a seaside encoun-
ter between a man and a mysterious veiled woman. “Write”, she tells him as
she gives the man a blue notebook and, before she begins to dictate, explains
to him that the Warrior of Light is “someone capable of understanding the
miracle of life, of fighting to the last for something he believes in”, and that
“­everyone is capable of these things”.11 When she is finished, back at the beach
in the single-page epilogue, he remarks that many of the things she has told
him contradict each other. The woman, getting up to leave, does not deny this.

         [T]he Warrior of Light knows that everything around him – his
         victories, his defeats, his rapture, and his despair – form [sic] part
         of his Good Fight. And he will know which strategy to use when he
         needs it. A Warrior does not try to be coherent; he has learned to
         live with his contradictions.12



   8.   Morais, A Warrior’s Life, 401.
   9.   Arias, Paulo Coelho, 21.
 10.    Ibid., 26.
 11.    mc, xiii; bk, Preamble; kc, 13.
 12.    mc, 268; bk, 70 (with modifications); kc, 191.



268
                                                   new age spirituality and islamic jihad



The Manual proper consists of 133 single-page units about the amorphous
Warrior of Light and the strategies and tactics he13 needs, both militarily and
psychologically, in order to fight the Good Fight, walk the Path and live his
Personal Legend as part of his Spiritual Quest.14 Essentially a manual to boost
his morale by sanctioning “everything around him” as a necessary part of
his destiny, the Manual mostly addresses in general, non-specific terms the
Warrior’s need for training and relaxation, rest and action, self-improvement
and self-acceptance, etc., and outlines his strategy for overcoming the many
negative emotions the difficulties of the Path inevitably bring him – doubt,
fear, loneliness, disappointment, cowardice, anger, and so on. In the main, this
strategy consists of either temporarily yielding to them or shrugging them off.
Whether he does one or the other depends on what his heart or, because he is
also capricious, his fancy tells him.
    On whose recommendation Basayev first glanced at the Manual is
unknown. Before filtering through to him, it had probably been circulating
among his men for some time, probably as a printout of a text file originally
downloaded from a Russian literary pirate website.15 At the time, like among
literate peoples the world over, Coelho was popular among young Chechens.16
In The Alchemist they may have found temporary respite from the sense-
less deprivations of their lives. Or else they may have found encouragement
to resist the tyranny under which they lived in its spiritual companion, the
Manual of the Warrior of Light. Given his wide-ranging duties as coordinator
of a regional jihad, it is doubtful that, even if he was fully aware of Coelho’s
currency among Chechen youth, Basayev had much if any grasp of Paulo
Coelho’s global influence, or that he was familiar with the latter’s other work.
This relative naïvety ensured that he approached the Warrior of Light with a
certain freshness of vision.
    In so far as the Manual’s emphasis on a struggle encompassing every aspect
of one’s life makes it suitable for guerrillas, nothing in it will have struck
Basayev as strange. As a commander habituated to the unpredictable, cha-
otic, incoherent life of a guerrilla, he had learned that being flexible in the field
was as important as being uncompromisingly determined in the pursuit of the
“dreams” or “aim” he set for himself “at the beginning of his struggle” – which,
in his case, was liberty and justice for the Chechen people.17


 13. Although we are all Warriors of the Light and Coelho’s protagonists are often women, for
     simplicity’s sake I follow the Manual’s exclusive use of the masculine pronoun.
 14. mc, passim.
 15. Assuming that he received the Manual in digital form would lend support to his claim that
     he produced the book in only two weeks: he could have used the modern plagiarists’ copy-
     and-paste method.
 16. Anon., “What They’re Reading”, 88.
 17. mc, 151; bk, 19; kc, 114.



                                                                                         269
eduard ten houten