Based on Benedict Anderson’s influential idea of imagined communities,
Derek Foster proposes that all communities larger than face-to-face net-
works must be imagined.38 Hence it is complicated navigations of recognition
between the public and the private, the subjective and the collective, that cre-
ates (produces) the community: “That which holds a virtual community intact
is the subjective criterion of togetherness, a feeling of connectedness that con-
fers a sense of belonging. Virtual communities require much more than the
mere act of connection itself.”39 The “more” hinted at is of course intentional
communication and interpretative practice.40 While there may be an imagined
“Satanic community” which has a social reality for some inclusive-minded
Satanists, the model shows little performance of this community outside a
narrowly defined “we” and a lot of resistance from other sectors of the milieu.
Accordingly, we should be very careful not to homogenize and simplify the
Internet or milieu as singular entities as “a multiplicity of cultural phenomena”
is contained within these concepts.41
    People tend to cluster in networks around discourses and practices shar-
ing specific themes, even if they move from one to the next in their search for
knowledge and experiences. There are thus various levels of “we-­information”
and a choice of avenues of “togetherness” and “antipathy” from which to build
communities in the plural, all of which are distributed and amplified by the
virtual realm. The early “frontier” of deterritorialized online Satanism has
been both strengthened and weakened by the gradual reterritorialization of
Satanisms online in the past decade, limiting heterodoxy and constructing
boundaries to establish a semblance of dominance. All the websites discussed
have “border zones”, whether it is a guestbook, a forum, or user-generated
content, stimulating conflict within and between local domains. To under-
stand such communities and authorities online, we have to understand the
“morphology” of discourse online, something enacted in speech – or writing.
This brings us back to the doorstep of the text. We will now turn to some
interesting ways of re-assessing the text-centric methodology of historiogra-
phy in light of these “webnographic” reflections.




 38. Foster, “Community and Identity”.
 39. Ibid., 29. See also Appadurai, Modernity at Large, 178–9, whose notion of “locality” as a
     phenomenological concept is tied to the concept of “neighborhood” (both virtual and spa-
     tial) as “situated communities”.
 40. Foster, “Community and Identity”, 34–35. Forster refers to Jürgen Habermas’s central posi-
     tioning of the speech act and concludes the article with the comment: “Perhaps then, the
     fullest understanding of the term [virtual community] is gained by grounding it in the com-
     municative act itself ”.
 41. Markham, “The Internet as a Research Context”, 360. See also Kendall, “Recontextualizing
     ‘Cyberspace’”, who suggests four research contexts eminently applicable to the study of
     milieus.


                                                                                           149
jesper aagaard petersen



FROM BOOK TO BIT: A BRIEF ASIDE ON TEXTUAL GENETICS

To assess textual practice online we must revisit the issue of inferences from
oral, written, ritual, or pictorial expressions to individual or collective systems
of belief. Tord Olsson convincingly argues that we have to be extremely careful
when analysing utterances as representations, as the adherents of a given reli-
gion do not necessarily believe what they are saying and doing, because what
they are saying and doing is context-dependent. In other words, we cannot
expect the multitude of divergent expressions of a religion to be systematically
connected in an isolate, coherent system implanted in people’s heads or in the
culture shared by them. This is especially clear with representations of gods
which “are conditioned by genre and speech situation”42 and may appear radi-
cally different in different contexts: anthropomorphic and concrete in myths
associated with a narrative situation, and pantheistic and abstract in hymns
related to a situation of praise. “[D]ifferent understandings dominate in differ-
ent speech contexts; … given conceptions find expression in given genres”.43
Accordingly, it is prudent to include reflections of the formal traits of aesthetic
and communicative genres in the analysis of religious expressions.
   These constructivist rules of thumb do not become any less relevant when
we address sources found on the Internet. I see at least two avenues of appli-
cation in the present context. First, we can apply genre dependency of gods
directly, noting that how Satan (and other sinister beings) is understood must
be related to genre and speech context. Whether Satan is a metaphor, a sym-
bol or a real entity is partly dependent upon the dogmatic stance of the group
or person in question, but also upon the conduit in which this “belief sys-
tem” is communicated – reflexive essays, mythical narratives and (especially)
hymns, prayer and ritual texts such as invocations.
   Secondly, and more importantly here, genre-dependency and speech con-
texts can be applied more broadly as a theoretical reorientation of how we
view texts. This is not so much about the nature of gods as about how Olsson’s
insights on oral literature can be applied to “hypertext” and new media prac-
tices. Basically, online texts constitute a new genre. I will focus on a partic-
ularly interesting example, namely the “posts” and “threads” on message or
discussion boards, which is both a common form of community software and
an accessible field for research. Here we move from fixed text consumption to
fluid text production and to the discursive negotiations of ideology, identity,
and community in hybrid texts. An analysis of these floating hybrids between
text and speech should be mindful of the hybridity of both the isolate post and
the thread as a whole, as well as the relation between threads and other types
of text and performance. The specific boundaries must be placed pragmatically


 42. Olsson, “Verbal Representation of Religious Beliefs”, 91.
 43. Ibid., 82–83.


150
                                                                          from book to bit



in relation to the concrete research programme; it is the dialogical aspect
which is of interest here – it is never sufficient to analyse a single post.
    “Texts” are not only referential, content-oriented and fixed, and “speech” is
not only performance. However, thought of as generic extremes on a contin-
uum, these types could illustrate different aspects of the functionality of com-
munication – primarily the asynchronous and the synchronous on one hand
and the mediate and the immediate on the other.44 “Posts” and “threads” could
be placed on this continuum as expressions between “chat” and “email”, on a
scale going from text to speech. In his analysis of “cybertalk”, Norman Denzin
makes similar connections through his concept of “performance speech” – a
text which, when in the form of a thread, is messy, dialogical, immediate, situ-
ated, and constantly reinterpreted, as speech; but which is precisely also a text
because it is written and therefore more unambiguous, proofread and thought
through beforehand.45 As such, “performance speech” is an enacted, hybrid
text revealing the immediacy of speech and the “mediacy” or fixation of writ-
ing, and thus the provisional and intermittent character of communication.
The written dialogue is in other words “betwixt and between”, at once produc-
ing community and fixating meaning, including and excluding, which is espe-
cially useful in an analysis attempting to correlate structure and actor, system
and practice, or speech situation and expression. Let us have a look at a spe-
cific example.


AUTHORITY AND HYBRID TEXTS: DISCUSSING “RITUAL” ON
SATANIC FORUM’S MESSAGE BOARD

      [Sp34k:] *makes a lovely curtsy* A-hoy out there land crabs … I
      have been thinking “Many Satanists say that they go through dif-
      ferent rituals and achieve a greater power/force within themselves
      when they perform it/When it is performed” Well, I am curious
      and want to know how the rituals YOU perform are done “if you
      perform rituals” And how does one achieve this “strength”?46

This is the first post in a thread on the Danish Satanisk Forum Message Board,
an official public discussion board established in 2002 by the organization
Satanisk Forum (Satanic Forum) to facilitate interaction between members
and accommodate guests.47 “Sp34k” asks the other participants about their


 44. See e.g. Simeon J. Yates, “Researching Internet Interaction”, 96–7.
 45. Denzin, “Cybertalk and the Method of Instances”, 111–112.
 46. SFO, “Ritual=Styrke”. Posted 25 October 2005. All posts are translated by the present
     author. I have tried to convey the free style of grammar and punctuation.
 47. I have previously discussed Satanisk Forum in Petersen, “Binary”, 600–606; and Petersen,
     “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”, 99–102.


                                                                                        151
jesper aagaard petersen