with esoteric discourse. That is, are there “already” spectrums of gender in
esoteric discourses that have been overlooked because the ­dominant con-
ceptual regime is to “sort” subjectivity (of any species, human or non-human)
into male, female, androgynous? Can the implicit taint of the “devious” that
accompanies esoteric traditions be critically embraced to produce “new” sub-
jectivities? Donna Haraway’s work on “emergent” subjectivities could per-
haps provide a useful paradigm with which to commence any such task.34 As I
have attempted to demonstrate elsewhere, her challenges to the boundaries of
human and non-human, nature and culture, can have strong resonance with
esoteric concepts of the subtle body.35
   To summarize, in the above overview of approaches it is also evident that
certain esoteric groups and practices have garnered more interest than others
in gender investigation: Theosophy, spiritualism, some sex magic traditions
(especially Crowley), mysticism, New Age religion and neopaganism. This
interest can be understood as stemming from either a clear association with
sex acts and practices and/or traditions in which female figures held dominant
organizational roles or featured strongly in the public consciousness, and/or
groups (for example the Radical Faeries) that clearly privileged non-normative
gender identities, including (but not exclusively) lesbian and gay.


Gender and esoteric epistemologies

Sitting in a sometimes conscious, sometimes unconscious relation to this
selection of “objects” of study is the issue of the way in which the episte-
mologies valorized and utilized by esoteric traditions are gendered. This is a
multi-layered consideration, which takes into account the gendering of eso-
teric discourses in relation to dominant modes of rationality, as well as the way
in which, within the dynamic corpus of Western esotericism, certain knowl-
edges and practices are clearly feminized and masculinized. As alternate epis-
temologies (creative imagination, symbolic and ontological correspondences,
intuition, higher perception, etc.) are a core feature of esoteric discourse, con-
sideration of the gendering of these epistemologies (within both dominant
and esoteric discourse) should be requisite for the field. Such studies would
not be about “gender in” esotericism but rather “gender as foundational/form-
ative” to Western esotericism.
   Given this central placement of creative practice, active imaginative and
correspondent logic in Western esotericism (including in Faivre’s oft‑cited
“tenets”)36 it is not surprising that part of the traditions’ “deviant” aura results
from the non-normative epistemologies valorized in their discourse and

 34. Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women.
 35. Johnston, “Cyborgs and Chakras”.
 36. Faivre, Access to Western Esotericism, 10–12.


                                                                                421
jay johnston



employed in their practices. These are implicit in the socio-cultural “other-
ing” of esotericism in a general sense, and with regard to contemporary
“occulture”37 they are part of their popular appeal.
    Over the last few decades cultural studies and feminist philosophy have
contributed significantly to thinking through both the gendering of knowledge
and of the senses (see for example the work of Genevieve Lloyd, David Howes
and Constance Classen).38 This work uncovered implicit bias in the valuation
and regard of certain types of knowledge, which are conceptually linked to
normative prescriptions of gender identity. Thus women were presented as
“naturally” (a troubling word if ever there was one) more emotional, which
at best resulted in heightened perception but much more commonly carried
associations of emotional liability and in increased innate risk to hysteria or
nefarious “spirit possession”. Without recounting these arguments in detail,
it is enough to note in this context that such binaries (reason–emotion) and
privileging of the “masculinized” sense of vision over the “feminized” touch
have also been critiqued in their application in contemporary “wellbeing spir-
ituality” and healing practices associated with New Age religion,39 but this
remit could be most usefully broadened.
    Therefore, on one level esoteric practices challenge the dominance of a cer-
tain type of scientific reason privileged by dominant discourse. This is in part
their appeal. On the other hand, normative gender associations continue to
be reproduced in esoteric discourses and practices. The most obvious gen-
eralization aligns male subjectivity with ritual magic or the “occult” sciences
and female subjectivity with “intuitive” knowledge (with the caveat that in
Theosophical discourse intuition is highly masculinized and the feminine is
associated with unruly emotional, “astral” states) and with a multiplicity of
forms of nature spirituality. This is the “men do magic/occult and women are
witches/mediums” trope. There are of course exceptions to this (a bit) naughty
generalization, but it does broadly seem that this dimorphic association fea-
tures not only as an element of the object of study – movement, discourse,
epistemology, practice, belief, ritual etc. – but is also reproduced in academic
analysis.


QUEERING THE ESOTERIC: FLUID SUBJECTS FOR FLUID OBJECTS

This final section turns to discuss possibly the most vibrant and contentious
application of gender theory to esoteric subject matter (including esoteric


 37. On “occulture” see Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West. Also cf. Chapter 6 of the
     present volume.
 38. See Lloyd, The Man of Reason; Howes, The Sixth Sense Reader; Classen, The Colour of
     Angels.
 39. See Barcan, Complementary and Alternative Medicine.


422
                                                        a deliciously troubling duo



epistemologies): that of queer theory. As with the term gender itself, the term
queer is encircled by debates as to its application and whether its deployment
– now thoroughly part of academic gender discourse – has made the use of
“queer” itself redundant.
    Emerging out of critical gender studies, queer signals unstable genders and
sexualities and is most often associated with a desire to trouble gender iden-
tity politics. As Annamarie Jagose recounts: “Queer theory’s debunking of
stable sexes, genders and sexualities develops out of a specifically lesbian and
gay reworking of the poststructuralist figuring of identity as a constellation of
multiple and unstable positions.”40 It therefore carries within it a deliciously
fluid and open notion of subjectivity, gender and sexuality that inherently
undermines not only dualist logic, but (crucially) the construction of any type
of stable gender identity (normative or non-normative). Indeed, Jagose argues
that queer’s applicability “to any number of discussions” is the result of its dis-
association from “specific identity categories”.41
    The process of “queering” has been taking place in numerous academic dis-
ciplines, and, as noted before, Jenny Blain takes up the queer “approach” in her
consideration of seidr. In regard to modern esotericism, it has been applied to
movements like Spiritualism (which are more commonly read vis-à-vis dis-
courses on women’s emancipation and the crisis of faith in late Victorian soci-
ety). Molly McGarry unfurls queer in this context as follows:

      From a twenty-first century standpoint, Spiritualism seems rather
      queer in at least three ways: as gender deviance and resistance to
      gender binarism, as sexual deviance both in the form of free love,
      which defied the regulatory structure of heterosexual marriage,
      and in corporeal same-sex connections that belie easy division
      between the homo-social and the homosexual; and as a language
      of gendered practice and erotic attachment that directly influenced
      the seemingly secular consolidation of these categories in the name
      of sexological science.42

This is a great diagnostic for not only what queer might usefully do/chal-
lenge, but also clearly illustrates that the queer project itself is not a ­monolith,
and embraces many strategies, concerns, differing objects of focus and
applications.
   Queer, then, has a myriad of potential applications within the study of
contemporary Western esotericism. It can be employed to disrupt norma-
tive epistemological binaries (exoteric–esoteric; male–female; homo–hetero,


 40. Jagose, Queer Theory, 3.
 41. Ibid., 2.
 42. McGarry, Ghosts of Futures Past, 159.


                                                                                 423
jay johnston