understood more than anyone else at that point in culture that, just
       as we can take apart particles until there’s a mystery, so we can do
       the same with culture, with words, language and image. Everything
       can be sliced and diced and reassembled, with no limit to the pos-
       sible combinations.65

There could hardly be a better summary of occultural processes than the sen-
tence italicized above.



 60. TOPY, Thee Grey Book.
 61. See Vale, RE/Search 4/5, 71.
 62. See P-Orridge, Esoterrorist, 34–7.
 63. The cut-up method was also used by other artists, notably David Bowie and Patti Smith. “‘I
     use Burroughs’ cut up technique’, Bowie explained in the BBC documentary, Cracked Actor.
     The camera panned in to show Bowie tearing sheets of lyrics down the middle and mov-
     ing the edges against each other to find new lines created in the process” (Sandford, Bowie,
     120).
 64. Burroughs & Gysin, The Third Mind, 44.
 65. P-Orridge, “Eyes Wide Shut” (emphasis added).


                                                                                            127
christopher partridge



      If one didn’t look at the very nature of how we build and describe
      our world, [Gysin] thought, we get into very dangerous places.
      Once you believe things are permanent, you’re trapped in a world
      without doors. Gysin constructed a room with infinite doors for us
      to walk through. What amazed me about Gysin’s work was how it
      could be applied to behaviour: there were techniques to free one-
      self through the equivalent of cutting up and reassembling words.
      If we confound and break up the proposed unfolding the world
      impresses upon us, we can give ourselves the space to consider
      what we want to be as a species … He would take words, break
      them down into hieroglyphics, then turn the paper and do it again
      and again until the magical square was filled with words. Gysin
      worked with the idea of painting as magic, to change the percep-
      tion of people and to reprogramme the human nervous system … I
      made an agreement with Gysin before his death that I would try to
      champion and vindicate his work and legacy.66

It is difficult to imagine anyone championing his work and legacy more enthu-
siastically than P-Orridge. Indeed, not only did he use the cut-up method to
produce new ideas, but he applied it, quite literally, to his own body in an
attempt to recreate himself. He and his late partner, Jacqueline Breyer (“Lady
Jaye”), following their marriage in 1993, embarked on what he termed the
“Pandrogeny Project”,67 which, informed by the cut-up technique, embraced
the aesthetics of body modification as the first step towards becoming a single
“pandrogynous” being. Indeed, it is important to understand that, speaking
in terms of a “genderless state”, for P-Orridge, who now has breast implants
and looks feminine, the surgery was not motivated by transsexual concerns.
That is to say, he was not struggling to be female while trapped in a male body.
The surgery was not even, primarily, about the ­construction of a post-human,
post-gendered self, such as Marilyn Manson sought to explore on Mechanical
Animals (1998).68 Rather, this was far more of an esoteric project, in that it
was an expression of his belief that the self is pure consciousness trapped
in flesh and controlled by DNA. Humans are, he believes, at an early stage
in their psychic evolution towards fleshless consciousness; the Pandrogeny
Project is a step towards that evolutionary goal; a step away from the “control”
of the DNA. He and Lady Jaye, therefore, sought to become one, in the sense



 66. Ibid.
 67. He was able to do this when, in 1998, he was awarded $1.5 million when he sued the pro-
     ducer Rick Rubin, following serious injuries, including nearly losing his left arm, when
     escaping a fire at Rubin’s Los Angeles home.
 68. For a good discussion of the post-human in relation to Marilyn Manson, see Toffoletti,
     Cyborgs and Barbie Dolls, 81–105.


128
                                                                        occulture is ordinary



of becoming a “third being”, Breyer P-Orridge.69 That is to say, they referred
to themselves together, in the singular, as Breyer P-Orridge. The Pandrogyny
Project, therefore, was an empirical reflection of that singularity. However, as
with much of P-Orridge’s thought, it is typically occultural, in that pandro­
gyny is a synergy of ideas, the principal thesis drawing on a common stock of
esoteric and transpersonal theories of consciousness and “Mind”.70 In other
words, in a typically occultural manner, P-Orridge, wittingly or unwittingly,
remixes a range of ideas with theories learned from Gysin and Burroughs, as
well as his own long-standing interest in body modification.
   For the esoterrorist, cut-up and the cultivation of occult culture are central
to the subversion of social control, just as pandrogyny is an act of resistance to
the control of the DNA. All forms of control must be disrupted and subverted.
Using cut-up as an occult technique, a form of magick, he argued that a small
group of esoterrorists could “have a disproportionate impact on culture”,71 dis-
rupt social programming and consensus solipsism.

      Control. Control needs Time (like a junkie needs junk). Time
      appears linear. Cut-ups make time arbitrary, non-linear. They
      reveal, locate and negate Control. Control hides in social struc-
      tures like Politics, Religion, Education, Mass Media. Control exists
      like a virus for its own sake. Cut-ups loosen rational order, break
      preconceptions and expected response. They retrain our percep-
      tion and acceptance of what we are told is thee nature of reality.
      They confound and short-circuit Control. All Control ultimately
      relies upon manipulation of behaviour. In culture thee Cut-up is
      still a modification of, or alternate, language. It can reveal, describe
      and measure Control … Magick as a method is a Cut-up Process
      that goes further than description. It is infused with emotion, intu-
      ition, instinct and impulse, and includes emotions and feelings
      … Control Disintegrates. Magick integrates. Thee idea is to apply
      thee cut-up principle of behaviour. Thee method is a contempo-
      rary, non-mystical interpretation of “Magick.” Thee aim is recla-
      mation of self-determination, conscious and unconscious, to the
      Individual. Thee result is to neutralise and challenge thee essence
      of social control.72


 69. “Third being” is a reference to the “third mind”, created by cut-up, as discussed in Burroughs
     & Gysin, The Third Mind.
 70. See, for example, Capra, The Turning Point, 410; Castaneda, Tales of Power, 100; Ferguson,
     The Aquarian Conspiracy, 73–5; Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 245–
     55; Wilber, “The Atman Project”.
 71. Ford, Wreckers of Civilisation, 10.29. See also Vale, RE/Search 4/5, 62–77; P-Orridge,
     Painful but Fabulous.
 72. P-Orridge, Esoterrorist, 18.


                                                                                              129
christopher partridge



It’s worth noting that the spelling and grammar are important. Whereas the
spelling of “magick” is simply taken from Aleister Crowley’s spelling conven-
tion (originally designed to distinguish his theories of magic from other inter-
pretations he considered superstitious or misguided), the other odd spellings
and grammatical constructions are intended to challenge thought and ways of
reading; our angle of vision is bent during the process of reading.
    Concerning cut-up, this is in many ways an essentially occultural process.
Indeed, it can be seen as a form of remix, as utilized in contemporary elec-
tronic music. With roots in Jamaican reggae culture, which was itself embed-
ded in a particular occulture, remixes are often radical deconstructions of
recordings.73 The point is that cut-up or remix is central to occulture. It is not
simply that particular ideas and signifiers are disseminated within an occul-
tural environment, but rather that in the process they are cut-up, remixed,
deconstructed and reconstructed. New synergies are formed, which are then,
in a dialectic process, cut-up and remixed, the results of which then attach to
other ideas and signifiers and so on. P-Orridge, therefore, did not simply coin
the term, but he is himself an excellent example of the subsequent sociological
theory. Central to P-Orridge’s esoterrorist use of magick was his band Psychic
TV and the related esoteric organization TOPY, founded with members from
Current 93 (notably David Tibet)74 and also, significantly, The Process Church
of the Final Judgment,75 the latter having had a formative influence on the
development of his occult thought.76 This is, again, a helpful illustration of the
social processes involved. That is to say, if one considers the numerous small
occultural organizations that coalesced as concrete social forms, such as those
within the vampire community (e.g. the House of Kheperu and the Order of
the Vampyre, the latter being a part of the Temple of Set)77 or the UFO subcul-
ture (e.g. the Aetherius Society, Unarius, and the Raelian Movement)78 or the
numerous other occulturally informed subcultures, often there is a confluence
of esoteric ideas, popular culture, and traditional supernaturalism. In other
words, as with TOPY, common interests and convictions lead to the formation
of concrete communities or organizations, whether virtually or in the flesh.79