awareness of the place of humans in the ecological web and of the ecological
limitations of humans in the Earth community”.53 Likening this paradigm to
a new age of humanity, Sessions states, “The Age of Ecology involves a major
‘paradigm shift’ to an ecocentric mode of understanding the world”.54
   Given the unmistakable similarity between Sessions’s “Age of Ecology” and
the “Age of Aquarius”, as well as the centrality of this seemingly utopian para-
digm shift in all of his work,55 it seems unreasonable for Sessions to define
Deep Ecology as radically separate from the New Age movement. The prob-
lem here concerns the difficulty in defining the New Age movement and the
complex way Sessions attributes higher knowledge to Deep Ecology. Following
Kennet Granholm’s comments on Wouter Hanegraaff ’s groundbreaking
scholarship, it can be said that a short-lived New Age movement began in the
1970s and held as its central belief an expectation of a New Age of Aquarius
before its general dissolution in the 1990s. Termed “New Age sensu stricto”
by Hanegraaff, this relatively small movement is now understood by schol-
ars as key in the popularization of esoteric discourses (including channelling,
neopaganism, Transpersonal Psychology and holistic science), yet should not
be conflated with these discourses directly.56 Consequently, in the technical
sense of the term, Sessions is right to differentiate between Deep Ecology and
the New Age movement (even if he misinterprets the latter57); however, he is
wrong in claiming that Deep Ecology exists apart from New Age understood
as the popularization of esoteric discourses. Sharing both a temporal and
geographical context,58 DE and the popularized esoteric discourses fused in
a number of highly innovative ways forming what von Stuckrad terms “discur-
sive transfers”.59 Fritjof Capra’s chapter in Sessions’s volume, “Deep Ecology: A
New Paradigm”, and Sessions’s general use of the term paradigm shift exem-
plify this type of transfer as both are marked by the appropriation of scientific
discourses, namely physics and ecology, by esoteric vision of the cosmos.60
   Sessions’s historiography and his concept of an ecocentric paradigm shift
form an esoteric basis that others have incorporated into their own expres-
sion of Deep Ecology, as Capra’s work shows. The problem is that regardless
of the degree of overlap between Sessions’s interpretation of Deep Ecology
and that of others, his interpretation does not permit any conflation between,


 53. Ibid., 66.
 54. Ibid., 66.
 55. See Devall & Sessions, Deep Ecology; Sessions, “Ecological Consciousness and Paradigm
     Change”; Sessions, Deep Ecology for the 21st Century.
 56. Granholm, “New Age or the Mass-popularization of Esoteric Discourse”; Hanegraaff, New
     Age Religion and Western Culture, 97.
 57. Sessions, “Deep Ecology and the New Age Movement” 290–92.
 58. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 97.
 59. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88–94.
 60. For a longer discussion of the New Age, Deep Ecology, and paradigm shifts see Zimmerman,
     Contesting Earth’s Future, 57–90.


300
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



on the one hand, the formulation of ecocentrism outlined in the manifesto,
and on the other, developments that stem from his historiography and use of
the term paradigm shift. As far as Sessions’ is concerned, esoteric, New Age,
Wiccan and neopagan discourses can be a part of Deep Ecology, but Deep
Ecology is not to be mistaken as inherently related to any of these discourses.
So, despite the undeniable similarities between modern Western shamanism
and Deep Ecology’s ecocentrism, Sessions’s definition prohibits reading any-
thing from the former into a definition of the latter.61 What has made defin-
ing Deep Ecology the most contentious aspect of DE is that Naess founded
Deep Ecology (at least as it is nominally understood as a modern move-
ment) on precisely a conflation of this sort. Recall that in his 1972 statement
Naess described Deep Ecology as a reflection of holistic ontology. Sessions’s
claim, then, that the manifesto “superseded” the 1972 statement puts him in
the peculiar position of imbuing Deep Ecology with esoteric knowledge, yet
unable to endorse the outlooks that readily follow from it (and in many ways
inspired it), such as ontological non-dualism or metaphysical holism.62
   Sessions’s impulse to, in the words of social ecologist John Clark, “conceive
of deep ecology more as a completed theoretical edifice to be defended than a
practical basis for cooperation between those with deep ecological concerns”63
has fostered a noticeable amount of criticism from the movement’s founder.
Describing it as a “grave misinterpretation”,64 Naess has been vocal about
his dissatisfaction with Sessions’s movement-as-manifesto interpretation. In
response to what had become the orthodox interpretation of Deep Ecology,
Naess wrote:

      The Eight-Points are, of course, not intended to function as a defi-
      nition of the deep ecology movement: neither as a rule-governed
      definition of the term, nor as a plain description of how the expres-
      sion “deep ecology movement” is actually used, nor as an expres-
      sion of the essence of the deep ecology movement. I do not know
      of any satisfactory definitions at the dictionary level.65

Illustrating the diplomatic tact that typifies Naess’s writing, he followed his
refutation by suggesting that the term “manifesto” should be replaced, stat-
ing “[a] longer name for the Eight Points is indispensable, for instance a set of
fairly general and abstract statements that seem to be accepted by nearly all

 61. For a brief summation of discursive transfer between neoshamanism and DE see von
     Stuckrad, “Reenchanting Nature”, 782–4. Also of note with regard to the discursive transfer
     between Deep Ecology and the currents studied in the field of Western esotericism, see von
     Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 143–4.
 62. Sessions, “Wildness, Cyborgs, and Our Ecological Future”, 149.
 63. Clark, “How Wide is Deep Ecology?”, 7.
 64. Naess, “The Deep Ecology Eight-Points Revisited”, 220.
 65. Ibid., 214.


                                                                                           301
joseph christian greer



supporters of the Deep Ecology movement”.66 Naess’s hesitance to define the
essence of Deep Ecology was pragmatic and mirrors the way in which he first
used the term as descriptive and not proscriptive. According to Naess, Deep
Ecology “is not a philosophy in any proper academic sense, nor is it institu-
tionalized as a religion or ideology”;67 Rather, he claims that the closest one
could come to a definition would include an index of all the diverse ecoso-
phies in the movement in addition to describing the process by which ecoso-
phies are created.68 Therefore, these factors, in addition to his own Ecosophy
T, must be examined if one is to map the complex and antagonistic relation-
ship between the definitions of Deep Ecology, the esoteric truth claims which
undergird them, and the esoteric elements that were developed from both.
Also, it bears mention that Ecosophy T merits special attention as it is com-
monly conflated with the philosophy of Deep Ecology. Considering its influ-
ence, this conflation is the most problematic in terms of reconciling both the
esoteric elaborations of Ecosophy T and the etic descriptions of Deep Ecology
as esoteric with its most popular interpretation, namely the one posited by
Sessions.
    Describing Naess’s Ecosophy T, Warwick Fox states, “the ‘esoteric core’ of
deep ecology is bound up with the psychological–spiritual–metaphysical idea
of what Naess refers to as Self-realization”.69 Though Fox’s insinuation that
DE is a unified eco-philosophy, and indeed has a “core”, is to be dismissed,
his use of the term “esoteric” is informative as it identifies the “psychologi-
cal–spiritual–metaphysical” concept of Self-realization fittingly, as esoteric.
Essentially, the transcendental state of Self-realization (inspired by Gandhi)
and the framework by which it is achieved (inspired by Spinoza) is the higher
knowledge Naess claims. Naess explains the context of this higher knowledge
in the phenomenological lexicon of “gestalt ontology”, the metaphysical frame-
work he created for his ecosophy. The primary characteristic of gestalt ontol-
ogy is ontological non-dualism, for, according to Naess, the universe contains
“no completely separable objects, [and] therefore no separable ego or medium
or organism [exists]”.70 Naess accounts for humanity’s inclination towards
dualist thinking by introducing the concept of a gestalt, which he describes
as a unit of perception that takes as its object the “concrete contents” of real-
ity, which in being perceived is separated into parts, objects and qualities by
the ego.71 Gestalt ontology organizes human development through a hierar-
chy of gestalts that range from the naïve realism perceived in normal states


 66. Ibid., 214.
 67. Naess, “The Deep Ecology Movement”, 266.
 68. Glasser, “On Warwick Fox’s Assessment of Deep Ecology”, 83, with reference to an unpub-
     lished manuscript by Naess.
 69. Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 76.
 70. Ibid., 56–7.
 71. Eric Katz, “Against the Inevitability of Anthropocentrism”, 31.


302
                                      deep ecology and the study of western esotericism