The consideration of gender in the field of Western esotericism has also
focused upon highlighting the roles of marginalized subjects through a reread-
ing and rewriting of dominant historical narrative, inclusive of uncovering and
redressing scholarly bias and the deployment of “gender” to mean women and/
or non-normative sexualities. There are ample examples of this genre, which
has been particularly active in the area of Theosophy, spiritualism, New Age
religion, and neopaganism. For example, Alex Owen’s The Darkened Room:
Women, Power and Spiritualism in Late Victorian England (1990); Cynthia
Eller’s Living in the Lap of the Goddess (1993), and Margot Adler’s Drawing
Down the Moon (1979). Such works discuss the significant role that individ-
uals and gender discourses played in the development of particular esoteric
practices, often highlighting the influence of socio-political circumstances on
their articulation.
   This approach is also inclusive of texts like Jeffrey J. Kripal’s Roads of Excess,
Palaces of Wisdom: Eroticism and Reflexivity in the Study of Mysticism, which
took as its remit not only gendered interpretations of esoteric literature but
also the gender orientations (and ambiguities) of the scholars who undertook
the studies. In particular Kripal considers the way in which an understand-
ing of the authors’ own subjectivities impacted upon their scholarship. Kripal’s
prime concern is the erotic or mystical experiences of the authors themselves,
highlighting “that mystical communities and literatures have offered some of
the most successful, if still ethically ambiguous, venues in which alternative
sexualities and genders have expressed themselves”.11 Here, then, is the identi-
fication of mystical discourse as a site of subversion.

   9. Michael F. Brown, The Channeling Zone, 93–114.
 10. Joy, “The Impact of Gender on Religious Studies”, 99.
 11. Kripal, Roads of Excess, Palaces of Wisdom, 17.

                                                                                    415
jay johnston



    The association of mysticism with sexuality has a long and complex her-
itage, which lies largely outside the bounds of this chapter; however, works
like Kripal’s do tie the consideration of such literature more closely to the aca-
demic study of esotericism. It should also be noted that the work of Elliot R.
Wolfson and Moshe Idel present particularly erudite analyses of the central
role of concepts of masculinity and femininity in Kabbalistic discourses and
the subversive potential of such texts for understanding mystical experience
and religious subjectivity.12
    Secret societies and initiation-based organizations, including Masonic
lodges, are all taken as “core” objects of study for contemporary esotericism,
and these include the production of studies specifically focused on the issue
of gender. Masonic traditions in particular as a bastion of men-only clubs
have come under sustained scrutiny both for the concepts of masculinity
they utilize and develop13 and for women’s roles in their institutions.14 Máire
Fedelma Cross’s edited volume on Gender and Fraternal Orders contributes
to this topic while placing considerations of Freemasonry in a broader context
of social guilds and monastic communities.15 Also found in this topic area is
Mary K. Greer’s historical account of Women of the Golden Dawn which is
noteworthy as a historical volume as well as an astrological analysis (a work of
esotericism itself ).16
    As already mentioned, a strong focus for the investigation of gender and
esotericism has been placed upon movements in which women have played
a leading role, including Theosophy, spiritualism, New Age religion and neo­
paganism. The latter in particular has accrued numerous studies, which is
unsurprising given the centrality of embodied experience to conceptualizations
of the divine (e.g. Goddess and God) in its various belief systems and in par-
ticular groups that have consciously identified with specific gender identities,
for example Dianic Wicca or the Radical Faeries. Examples are readily found
of groups which challenge normative dimorphic concepts of gender as well as
those that reinforce dominant (and essentialist) concepts of masculinity = cul-
ture = rationality and femininity = nature = intuition. Indeed, the assumption
that magicians are only men and witches are only women is disappointingly
common. This is no doubt furnished by long-held popular images of wicked
female witches and diabolical male magicians from Faustus to Witchy-Poo (of
the H. R. Pufnstuf television series, 1969). Such stereotypes persist in the pub-
lic imagination despite the central role of, for example, Gerald Gardner and
Alex Sanders in the development of popular forms of contemporary Wicca.


 12. See e.g. Wolfson, Language, Eros, Being; Idel, Kabbalah and Eros.
 13. E.g. William D. Moore, Masonic Temples.
 14. As exemplified by Heidle & Snoek, Women’s Agency and Rituals in Mixed and Female
     Masonic Orders.
 15. Cross, Gender and Fraternal Orders in Europe, 1300–2000.
 16. Greer, Women of the Golden Dawn.


416
                                                             a deliciously troubling duo



   The “femininity = nature = intuition” logic was (and continues to be)
actively used by practitioners like Diane Stein, whose biography for Women’s
Psychic Lives (1995) presents her as: “healer, psychic, witch and priestess of the
Goddess. An activist in anti-war movements, women’s rights, gay rights and
rights of the disabled”.17 In this text psychic skills and intuition are presented as
particularly feminine traits that have been “submerged” by patriarchal culture.
While she acknowledges that men can be psychic too, as an extra-sensory
skill it is understood by Stein to be specifically women’s knowledge: “women
are psychic, and the experiences of virtually every woman prove this”.18 It is,
she contends, intimately interwoven with female reproductive and sexual
anatomy:

        From the place of creation, the womb and the vulva of the Great
        Mother Goddess of a thousand names and all cultures, comes the
        psychic lives and psychic wisdom of women. The woman who
        knows her womb power, her psychic life and claims it, stroked the
        python.19

Such a universal concept of “woman” has been critiqued – especially by post-
colonial theorists – not only for its deployment in the field of contempo-
rary spiritualities, but also for its use by feminist philosophers (such as Luce
Irigaray) who have argued for specifically feminine forms of epistemology and
aligned them with a generic category “woman”, that is actually based upon the
experience of Euro-centric white women, to the exclusion of other types of
difference, for example racial and class difference.20 However, the construction
of a feminine universal subject is not the only form of gender essentialism to
be found in neopagan cultures.
   It is clear in Michael F. Strmiska and Baldur A. Sigurvinsson’s study of
Icelandic and American Ásatrú that normative gender essentialism features
in contemporary Nordic neopagan practices.21 These subject positions – pre-
scriptions of warrior men and hearth-tending women – are defined and main-
tained through reference to contemporary interpretations of gender relations
in saga literature. It should be noted, as Strmiska points out in his discus-
sion of Icelandic Ásatrú, that regional and cultural location play a significant
role in the beliefs and practices of different Ásatrú communities: “All Ásatrú
groups are united in attempting to reconstruct and reinterpret for modern
times the myths, beliefs, and folklore of pre-Christian Scandinavia … they
differ widely in the types of knowledge and assumptions which they bring to


 17.   Stein, Women’s Psychic Lives.
 18.   Ibid., 5.
 19.   Ibid., xvniii.
 20.   See for example, Moreton-Robinson, Talkin’ Up to the White Woman.
 21.   Strmiska & Sigurvinsson, “Asatru”.


                                                                                    417
jay johnston