Traditionally, this milieu was “located” in informal networks and flows that
were in place long before the Internet, especially via books and periodicals,
but also more broadly disseminated through suggested reading lists of occult
groups, word-of-mouth and bulletin boards in occult shops, seminars, con-
certs and fairs, and classified ads in magazines and newspapers. So, in a sense,
the cultic milieu has always been mediatized and thus “deterritorialized”.4
What the Internet offers is a new access point. Thus, the virtual realm has a
potential to reterritorialize research aiming at “thick description”, just as it has
affected the development of and recruitment to decentralized religious move-
ments by providing new gateways.5
   Turning to new types of material, the actual propagation of places of
“online-religion” (new interactive environments) and tools of “religion-online”
(traditional top-down communication) has to be seen in relation to specific
offline interests, rhetorics of tradition, authority and legitimacy, and the real
or imagined fears of pollution and dilution.6 This is a sound approach, and
not new. What is new are the hybrid texts we find online, situated between
text and speech, displaying interpretative practices which on the one hand
construct a meaningful social order and on the other are conditioned by the
same order – ideally in the form of “virtual ­community”. As the speech situ-
ation is embedded in these sources in a unique way through the medium, it
should be possible to see the negotiations, conflicts and tactics that encircle
any text concretely expressed in these texts. In order to assess such commu-
nity and authority building in a virtual environment, I will argue for a dis-
cursive approach as a conduit between the traditional methodologies of the



      Hammer, Claiming Knowledge; Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture;
      Jorgensen, The Esoteric Scene; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1.
   4. This understanding of “territory” is anthropological and tied to issues of “glocalization”;
      see Appadurai, Modernity at Large; Lyon, Jesus in Disneyland. On market models and
      commodity networks, see e.g. Ezzy, “The Commodification of Witchcraft”; Ezzy, “White
      Witches and Black Magic”; Heelas, Spiritualities of Life; Redden, “The New Age”. On the
      importance of books, journals, and the media, see e.g. Aloi, “Rooted in the Occult Revival”;
      Ezzy, “New Age Witchcraft?”. On older “networks” of books, see Owen Davies, Grimoires,
      chapters 5–8.
   5. Much has been done on cyber-paganism, see e.g. Cowan, Cyberhenge; Ezzy, “The Com­
      modification of Witchcraft”. On the “technopagan” avant-garde, see e.g. Hadden & Cowan,
      “Virtually Religious”; Erik Davis, Techgnosis, especially 190–225.
   6. For a good summary of the state of affairs in researching these matters, see Dawson,
      “Religion and the Internet”. The very useful distinction between “online-religion” and
      “religion-online” is proposed in Helland, “Online-Religion/Religion-Online and Virtual
      Communitas”; Helland, “Surfing for Salvation”. For recent studies with special relevance
      to Religious Studies, I suggest Heidi Campbell, Exploring Religious Community Online;
      Dawson & Cowan, Religion Online; Højsgaard & Warburg, Religion and Cyberspace; and
      Karaflogka, E-religion.



                                                                                             135
jesper aagaard petersen



history of religions and the various methodologies of “cyber-anthropology”.7
This alternative should facilitate virtual fieldwork by softening the textual bias
of historiography and the actor bias of participant observation.


NEW CONTEXTS, NEW BOUNDARIES: CHARTING THE SATANIC MILIEU

A standard web search for “Satan”, “Satanic” and “Satanism” produce hits in
the millions, offering anything from Satan’s Cheerleaders to film clips outing
President Obama’s “satanic agenda”. Broadly speaking, there are two main dis-
courses on the satanic today, both of which can be located online. On the one
hand, we have the various cultural narratives on Satan and Satanism, which
form part of the “occultural” landscape of Western societies and are recycled
in popular culture by moral entrepreneurs such as media commentators, con-
spiracy bloggers and cult watch groups, and occasionally by adolescents and
provocateurs.8 On the other hand, there are the satanic discourses among self-
declared Satanists within a “satanic milieu”, appropriating the figure of Satan
into identity work.9 This is a discursive subgroup within the cultic milieu com-
prised of self-identified satanic “belief systems and their associated practices”,
and includes “the collectivities, institutions, individuals, and media of com-
munication associated with these beliefs”.10 It is the basic constituency and
character of this milieu that is our first concern.
   Rising out of the cultic milieu of 1960s California, Anton LaVey established
the Church of Satan in 1966. In the “golden age” from 1966 to 1972, the High
Priest and his church enjoyed a strong media presence, fully in tune with the
general upsurge of interest in the occult and witchcraft, which stimulated the
condensation of an autonomous satanic milieu out of the heterodox discourses
at the time.11 However, as illustrated by even a ­cursory reading of biographic
material, the church was never alone.12 As the Internet opened the floodgates
in the 1990s, the quantity and visibility of material produced and distributed
by alternatives to the Church of Satan underwent a drastic surge, transforming
the satanic milieu itself into a more polyvocal entity through feedback loops.


   7. As a young discipline, nomenclature is still under negotiation (cyber-anthropology, web-
      nography, netnography, virtual ethnography); a good overview, with an extensive bibliogra-
      phy, is provided by Markham & Baym, Internet Inquiry.
   8. Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”, 92. Cf. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2,
      207–55; Petersen, “Smite Him Hip and Thigh”.
   9. Petersen, “Introduction”, 3–6; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”, 92–3.
 10. Colin Campbell, “The Cult”, 122. I understand “belief ” as a dynamic, practised concept
      rather than static substance; Petersen, “Introduction”, 3.
 11. Petersen, “Satanists and Nuts”; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”, 94–101. Cf. Barton, The
      Church of Satan.
 12. For examples, see Aquino, The Church of Satan; Baddeley, Lucifer Rising, 100–113; Barton,
      The Church of Satan, chapters 2 and 4; Mathews, Modern Satanism, chapter 5.


136
                                                                                from book to bit



   In consequence, Satanism has become both a global deterritorialized phe-
nomenon and reterritorialized in local contexts outside the United States and
LaVey’s original church. First of all, clashes over the definition of Satanism
itself have produced numerous small networks, communities, and organiza-
tions, first through email discussion groups and Usenet (e.g. alt.satanism), and
later through community groups (such as Yahoo and Google) and social net-
work sites (especially Myspace and Facebook). Many have a website of their
own and participate in the frequent “flame wars” that are so prevalent online.
Second, even though LaVey’s Satanic Bible (1969) has stayed atop the status
pile, it now has serious competition from Internet-based material and material
promoted through the Web.13
   To take the second issue first, the print-on-demand site Lulu.com offers a
variety of Satanic material, such as Michael Ford’s Luciferian Witchcraft and
Tsirk Susej’s The Demonic Bible, alongside Church of Satan-“approved” essay
collections like James D. Sass’s Essays in Satanism. Books can of course also
be bought through Amazon or independent publishers such as Stephen E.
Flowers’s Rûna Raven. In the same vein, Michael Aquino’s massive e-books on
the Church of Satan and the Temple of Set can be downloaded for free from
the Temple website.14 Finally, some websites actually function as archives with
material of both introductory and advanced nature, superseding any engage-
ment with printed books.15
   The uneasy connections between these examples point to the difficulty of
establishing the boundaries of the satanic milieu and satanic discourse from
both an insider and outsider perspective. Subjects such as witchcraft, demon-
ology and Chaos Magick are discussed by many of these writers, and both
Diane Vera and Joy of Satan link to a variety of neopagan, esoteric, and occult
websites. In contrast, the Church of Satan’s disdain towards devil worshippers,
neopagans and occultists is widely documented, even though LaVey frequently
borrowed from them all.16 Thus the discourse of individual Satanists and even


 13. See Lewis, “Infernal Legitimacy”, 42, 44. Studies focusing on “cyber-Satanism” have been
     few, arguably beginning with Roald E. Kristiansen’s now dated “Satan in Cyberspace”
     (1995, updated 2001). Important sociological work has been done by James R. Lewis, espe-
     cially on the basic demographics of Satanism today (e.g. “Who serves Satan?”, “Infernal
     Legitimacy”, “Fit for the Devil”). Finally, there are a handful of local case studies making use
     of Internet material and shorter, exploratory essays on Internet-Satanism, usually based on
     a period of “surfing” and snowball-sampling sites, texts and images (e.g. Alisauskiene, “The
     Peculiarities of Lithuanian Satanism”; Dyrendal, “Devilish Consumption”; Petersen, “Binary
     Satanism”; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”; Ringvee, “Satanism in Estonia”; Sieg, “Angular
     Momentum”; Smoczynski, “Cyber-Satanism and Imagined Satanism”).
 14. See ToS, “Temple of Set”.
 15. See e.g. JoS, “Joy of Satan”; Crabtree, “The Descriptions, Philosophies and Justification of
     Satanism”; Vera, “Theistic Satanism”.
 16. Cf. Petersen, “Satanists and Nuts”, 226–32; Petersen, “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”;
     Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”. Cf. Chapter 4 of the present volume.


                                                                                                137
jesper aagaard petersen