towards the real world, and they do share strategies of in-group cleansing and
out-group marginalizing, especially when compared to other, more esoteric
groups less socially embedded offline such as Venus Satanas and HISS. In con-
trast to individual networks, organizational relations need to be regulated or
the boundaries between group and wider setting become unstable. In a wider
picture, whether the tool of communication is used honestly or deceptively,
and whether the virtual place itself is viewed as a goldmine or a rubbish heap,
depends on the identity of the group in question, the relations of participants,
and a host of other aspects tied to global and local factors. The Internet is het-
erogeneous and constantly negotiated to different extents depending on situa-
tion, individual interests, and collective decisions.
   The basic analysis presented here can be extended to other comparable reli-
gious milieus exhibiting a decentralized and fragmented nature offline and
online, such as the “Thelemic milieu”, which resembles the satanic one studied
in the present context. The proliferation of accessible sites makes it possible
to follow currents, groups and individuals from a variety of perspectives, and
the webometric meta-tools provide both data and visual aid when charting
these milieus from the ground up. We can study official organizational web-
sites, compare them with regional or individual sites, and thus facilitate a geo-
graphical comparison of distinctive styles and common iconography, parlance
and identity. Or we can focus on the milieu itself, through Facebook fan pages,
detractors and even concepts; online literature archives; relevant studies avail-
able from private sites; and Wikipedia or one of the increasingly specialized
Wikis. Finally, when combined with the reflections on virtuality and power, we
can use this methodological apparatus on a micro level as well, and be atten-
tive to the small-scale interventions and their ideological and performative
dimensions. The discussions on message boards as hybrid texts are an obvi-
ous source for these investigations; indeed, the hybrid text is a new genre with
direct access to plays of power and discourse.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This chapter is based on the paper “Enacted Satanism: Religion in Hybrid
Texts” presented at the EASR/DVRW conference Plurality and Representa­
tion: Religion in Education, Culture and Society, University of Bremen, 23–27
September 2007. I would like to thank Asbjørn Dyrendal, Olav Hammer and
the editors for valuable comments on earlier versions of the chapter.




158
chapter 8

ACCESSING THE ASTRAL WITH A
MONITOR AND MOUSE
ESOTERIC RELIGION AND THE ASTRAL LOCATED
IN THREE-DIMENSIONAL VIRTUAL REALMS

John L. Crow


During the new moon every month, at a predetermined time, a world-
wide group of occultists astrally meet at Moonbase Temple located under
the surface at the centre of the visible part of the moon. Here each partici-
pant performs individual rituals in the astral temple, while working with the
agreed-upon word of power and sigil. After the ceremony, each participant
records his or her experiences, and these are distributed among the group
for comparison.1 According to Margaret Ingalls, who uses the pseudonym of
Soror Nema and coordinates these ceremonies, there is a reflecting pool at the
centre of the temple with the Earth centred in it sending all positive energy
from the rites back to the planet. When asked if she could see others in the
temple when present, she said she could not distinguish individuals but often
could feel their presence.2
   Ingalls’s description of astral travel is typical within occultism and can be
traced back to the techniques and experiences recorded by individuals in such
nineteenth-century groups as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn and
the Theosophical Society. During these astral travel episodes, the individual
imaginatively leaves her or his physical body and travels to places in this world
or another dimension. The travellers claim that their inner selves travel into
an imaginative environment generally accessible only to themselves. Here
they encounter various entities, objects and structures with which they can
interact. In 1895, prominent Theosophist and clairvoyant, Charles Webster
Leadbeater (1854–1934) published The Astral Plane, which described the
various sceneries, phenomena, and human and non-human inhabitants one
might encounter in the astral environment.3 Within the Hermetic Order of


   1. Ingalls, “The Evolution of Maat Magick”, 181.
   2. Telephone interview by author, 22 September 2006.
   3. Leadbeater, The Astral Plane.


                                                                             159
john l . crow



the Golden Dawn, a nineteenth-century initiatory occult organization, travel-
ling or “descrying” on the astral plane was an important activity an initiate was
required to master in order to “obtain a clear idea of the relation of Man to
the Universe, and to the spiritual planes”.4 These notions of the astral and the
abilities and techniques to travel in it were adopted by many occultists, such as
Aleister Crowley (1875–1947) and Edgar Cayce (1877–1945), and transmitted
into the twentieth century. By the mid- to late twentieth century these ideas
and techniques were diffused and incorporated into numerous groups and
esoteric religions, the most prominent being New Age and neopaganism.
   With the emergence of computer technology, and the Internet specifically,
various groups of people began to transfer the imaginative quality of the astral
environment to cyberspace, and language that was previously used to refer
to the astral was now used to describe cyber realms. Some of the earliest ref-
erences to the Internet as the astral plane can be found in the work of Erik
Davis, a self-described culture critic. In “Technopagans”, published in Wired in
1995, Davis interviewed Mark Pesce, a computer programmer and neopagan,
about his understanding of the Internet. Pesce notes that “Both cyberspace
and ­magical space are purely manifest in the imagination. … Both spaces are
entirely constructed by your thoughts and beliefs.”5 Indeed, even the essay’s
subtitle, “May the Astral be Reborn in Cyberspace”, denoted the ideologi-
cal transference of occultism’s astral plane to cyberspace. Yet there were still
significant impediments to cyberspace becoming just like the astral plane
as described by nineteenth- and twentieth-century occultists. One was that
text and static images on webpages still required the individual to look at the
content and then imaginatively construct the “cyberastral” with their imagi-
nations. The Internet was simply a way to deliver the content, but the per-
son still had to imaginatively assemble it to bring the cyberastral realm alive.
This process significantly changed with the emergence of three-dimensional
graphical representation on the Internet. Another problem was the physical
body. What happened to one’s body while in the astral? This question similarly
occupied nineteenth-century occultists. Yet contemporary practitioners in the
cyber­astral have found new ways to deal with this question, or significantly
adapted older solutions.
   The newest three-dimensional virtual worlds do provide the possibility to
convincingly represent a cyberastral world, and some esoteric ­religious practi-
tioners are using these worlds as places to practise their religion. One of these
virtual environments is a computer system called Second Life. More than just
seeing Second Life as an alternative place for communicating with others in
virtual reality, some esoteric religious practitioners understand it to actually
be the astral world. That is, they see no substantive difference between an


   4. King, Astral Projections, Ritual Magic, and Alchemy, 75.
   5. Erik Davis, “Technopagans”.


160
                                         accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



imaginary astral plane described by the early occultists and the Second Life
computer system itself. Moreover, this cyberastral environment has an added
benefit that the astral environments visited by nineteenth-century occultists
lacked: one can travel to the cyberastral and communicate with others while
doing so. Thus the transfer of ideas about the astral plane to cyberspace and
the development of sophisticated three-dimensional virtual worlds has led to
the emergence of a particularly new type of astral plane, one that is imagina-
tive, embodied, computer generated, and most importantly, social.


THE EMERGENCE OF THE ASTRAL PLANE AND
NOTIONS OF THE SELF WITHIN IT