If these changes make the text look dangerously Salafist, it should be known
that Basayev was unworried by the Manual’s various explicitly Christian refer-
ences and very unorthodox, un-Islamic ideas. It opens with a motto lifted from
the Gospel of Luke and dedicatory prayer to the Virgin Mary, and occasionally
speaks of “Christ” instead of the more neutral “Jesus” – all of which are signs
that outwardly place it in the (Roman Catholic) Christian camp. As to un-
Islamic beliefs, several times the Warrior has some form of contact with the
Soul of the World, an entity presented as separate from God – which comes
perilously close to setting up a partner next to God, the gravest of Islamic sins
according to the Qur’an, especially in the hardcore Salafist interpretation.68


THE BLUE BOOK

        Do they not ponder the Qur’an? Had it been from other than God,
        they would have found much inconsistency therein.69

 66.   Qur’an 4: 74–5.
 67.   mc, 173; bk, 25; kc, 129.
 68.   See e.g. Qur’an 27: 59–64.
 69.   Qur’an, 4: 82.


                                                                              281
eduard ten houten



The immediate response to virtually all of the above might be that Basayev
fatally misunderstood Paulo Coelho, who presumably never meant his text to
be interpreted in this way. Though this objection is understandable, it does
not address the fundamental question. Author’s intentions mean little when
the discourse of the text itself says something different. And what it says is
that there are no boundaries between the material and spiritual. That is to say,
Coelho’s worldview is founded on a (conscious? semi-conscious?) blurring of
the boundaries between warriors and “warriors”, blood and “blood”, swords
and “swords”, and between real and unreal or, to be more precise, between real
and make-believe.
   Having seen how well the contents of the Warrior’s blue notebook grasped
and could be harmonized with the lifeworld of a man who made no bones
about summary executions and who, on top of that, gave the last full measure
of devotion to his cause, one should like to ask Coelho whether he would con-
cede that the Warrior of Light is not really a warrior. One should like to ask if
he would concede that his invitation to take to heart that you do not have to
ask anyone else for permission to wield your sword, nor waste time explain-
ing your actions, implies an encouragement to dispose of all conventional (i.e.
communicable and negotiable) criteria against which to measure behaviour.
To appropriate the right to live according to a radically individual para-­ethics
comparable in aspiration (but only in aspiration) to that of Kierkegaard’s
Abraham. To declare war on everything that blocks your Path towards living
the dream of total freedom from almost everything except the infallible inner
guidance given by God? In sum, one would like to put the question to Coelho
of whether the Warrior represents a warrior with spirit or in spirit – or poten-
tially both? The glimpse of him dancing down the street strongly suggests that
he only represents a warrior in spirit (i.e. a make-believe warrior). To deny this
and assert that there are Warriors of Light on some immanent–worldly (as
opposed to transcendent–astral) plane would open up the unpalatable pos-
sibility that Shamil Basayev’s reading was indeed a justified one – in fact, that
Basayev was a model Warrior of Light. A third option, presumably preferred
by Coelho, would be to position the Warrior’s war somewhere on the astral
plane.70 But that would raise the question of why a Warrior should be inclined
to translate a divine calling into good works (i.e. “atheistic” action – and all
social action is “atheistic”, no matter how divinely inspired).71
   In Coelho’s intended meaning, I think it is safe to say, the Manual invites
the reader to imagine being part of the adventure popularly associated with


 70. Cf. Coelho, The Valkyries, 207.
 71. Social relations exist only between humans on a plane on which God cannot actively and
     directly participate without destroying precisely what makes the social what it is. Therefore,
     social action – all action aimed at influencing the social realm directly – must without
     exception be regarded as “atheistic”, that is, as though there were no God (ideally by the
     divinely inspired actors themselves as well).


282
                                          new age spirituality and islamic jihad



the life of a real warrior without having to deal with any of the real inherent
difficulties and dangers, for instance evading enemy mortar fire. Within the
Manual’s world it is inconceivable that the Warrior finds death on the bat-
tlefield or ends up on the bottom of a pit behind enemy barracks. The enemy
cannot kill him, defeat him, take him prisoner, torture him, nor abduct his
kinsmen. The Good Fight in its intended meaning is therefore war with-
out war, conflict without conflict against an enemy that does not really exist
– make-believe.
   Basayev was nevertheless neither naïve nor unreasonable when he inter-
preted Coelho’s militant language of religious struggle not in its pedestrian
and bloodless sense, but as speaking simultaneously of spiritual struggle
against losing morale and of material struggle against an enemy. To support
this point, here are three passages that together lay bare Coelho’s seductive
ontological sleight:

     For the Warrior of Light, there     For the Mujahid, there are
     are no abstractions. Everything     no abstractions. Everything
     is concrete and everything          is concrete and everything
     is meaningful. He does not          is meaningful. He does not
     sit comfortably in his tent,        sit comfortably in his tent,
     observing what is going on in       observing what is going on in
     the world; he accepts every         the world; he accepts every
     challenge as an opportunity         challenge as an opportunity
     to transform himself. … The         to transform himself. … The
     Warrior … transforms his            Mujahid … transforms his
     thinking into action.               thinking into action.72

     A Warrior of Light is never         A Mujahid is never indifferent
     indifferent to injustice. He        to injustice. He knows that
     knows that all are one and that     all are one and that each
     each individual action affects      individual action affects
     everyone on the planet. That        everyone on the planet. That
     is why, when confronted by          is why, when confronted by
     the suffering of others, he uses    the suffering of others, he uses
     his sword to restore order.         his sword to restore order.73

     Whenever the Warrior                Whenever a Mujahid bares his
     draws his sword, he uses            weapon, he uses it. On Chechen
     it. … The Warrior never             kinzhals [daggers] is written: “Do
     makes threats. He can               not unsheathe without need, do


72. mc, 69; bk, 14; kc, 61.
73. mc, 77; bk, 22; kc, 66.


                                                                              283
eduard ten houten



      attack, defend himself or                  not sheathe without deed.” … The
      flee; all of these attitudes               Mujahid never makes threats. He
      form part of combat. It                    can attack, defend himself or flee;
      is not, however, part of                   all of these attitudes form part of
      combat to diminish the                     combat. It is not, however, part of
      force of a blow by talking                 combat to diminish the force of
      about it. … The sword was                  a blow by talking about it. … The
      not made to be used by                     weapon was not made to be used
      the mouth.                                 by the mouth.74

Which words in the first passage can be taken in a purely metaphorical, spir-
itual sense? Certainly, a Warrior with a mortgage will take the tent as a roman-
tic adornment. Similarly, in the second passage the word that the pedestrian
Warrior is inclined to read metaphorically is “sword”. But what about the third
passage? The make-believe Warrior is naturally pressed to interpret even this
passage, including the unambiguous distinction between “swords” and “words”,
as referring, somehow, not to an actual, but to a spiritual sword. And this does
more than diminish the force of its blows; it nullifies it.75 For Basayev it was
much easier to bring the text closer to his world. Fighting against a very real
and very brutal enemy, he attained concretization just by replacing “sword”
(metch) with “weapon” (oruzhie) and adding a Chechen kinzhal inscription.
As regards the “astral sponsorship” of his lonely battle, he could rely on what
the Qur’an teaches: “Prophet, urge the believers to fight: if there are twenty of
you who are steadfast, they will overcome two hundred, and a hundred of you,
if steadfast, will overcome a thousand of the disbelievers. … God is with the
steadfast”.76


CONCLUSION

In the preceding pages we have seen the outlines of a variety of ways in which
the book that Paulo Coelho regards as his most personal chimed with the spir-
itual and material life of Shamil Basayev. Since the Manual of the Mujahid is
his main literary production, we may regard it as his spiritual testament as
well. That both these books are so central to their authors may be their most
peculiar characteristic. Had we, say, had only rumours that the great Chechen
terrorist Shamil Basayev recreationally read a book by Paulo Coelho, we would
have added him to the list of bloodstained men who appreciate Coelho’s work