take on the significance and interpretation of ritual in a satanic context.
As we can see from Table 7.2, Satanisk Forum is a small fish in the global
satanic milieu, ranking low in both traffic rank and inlinks. This is probably
due to the language barrier, as well as the quite explicit and enforced ration-
alist take on Satanism, which prohibits any large-scale networking with
esoteric Satanists, talk of “Satanic community” and “Satanic ‘subculture’”
notwithstanding.48
    Satanisk Forum itself developed from a small group of individuals associ-
ated with the Church of Satan-affiliated organization Prometheus Grotten
(the Prometheus Grotto, briefly named COS DK) in the late 1990s. In the
aftermath of LaVey’s death, they reorganized first as an independent group
and later after internal disagreement, split the organization into two separate
entities in 2001, of which Satanisk Forum was the largest and most success-
ful in terms of media penetration and subcultural support. Today, although
the activity has declined due to further schism and general fatigue, Satanisk
Forum is the most visible and accessible association of rationalist Satanists
in Denmark with about 200 members and 555 participants on their message
board. I have chosen this particular thread because it reflects the character of
the board in the heyday of the group, even though it is now certainly a thing
of the past.
    Sp34k’s post is characterized by an immediate and speech-oriented form. It
is filled with language markers of an oral nature and the sentence construction
is typical of speech, not writing. In addition, one finds a lot of grammatical
and spelling errors, expressive use of quotation marks signifying reservation
or addition, and the use of the slash to vary or optimize information. Notice
also the common paralinguistic use of asterisks to perform an action in writ-
ing: “*makes a lovely curtsy*”. This is typical of chat and SMS-language, and is
a written contextual event – a stage management of sorts. The many speech
codes soften the written form and set an informal tone, but the post is in effect
a written text using oral codes and is as such asynchronous and mediate in
spite of the form. The post gives the impression of an inquirer who is of minor
importance on the specific message board, in the offline group behind it, and
in the amorphous milieu of Satanists online.
    Sp34k is asking two questions: how other Satanists perform rituals, and how
he (or one) achieves strength through them. The same day, “Amina” answers:

      There aren’t many users of ritual on the board (in particular) judg-
      ing by earlier threads. As a replacement I would recommend the
      section on rituals in “Gud er (stadig) blå” which gives some theo-
      retical background. Otherwise you might relate to peoples expe-
      riences with certain types of rituals by thinking of some piece of


 48. See SFO, “Vedtægter for Satanisk Forum”, article 2 (my translation).


152
                                                                           from book to bit



      music that has affected you strongly. The special thing about rituals
      is that they speak directly to our feelings in the same way music
      can do. The best known satanic rituals are those mentioned in “The
      Satanic Bible” and “The Satanic Rituals”. In my opinion these rituals
      are not practised by many, however.49

This post is much more text-oriented and distanced than Sp34k’s: notice the
construction of sentences and the informational “flow” in the text. It seems
proofread and professional. Amina refers to previous threads on the board,
academic literature (Gud er (stadig) blå by Michael Rothstein), personal expe-
rience (articulated through a “we”), LaVey’s books, and personal assessments
in the beginning and end. Without rejecting the question outright, the answer
nevertheless communicates that practising rituals is something marginal in
satanic circles (not many users [in particular], not practised by many), some-
thing natural (equal to strong emotions), and something that can be studied in
both academic and satanic literature (Rothstein and LaVey).50 An interpreta-
tion of ritual is thus articulated that is not only substantiated by the content
of the text, its “what”, but also its form, the “how”, for example through the
references to real texts offline and the textual essayistic appearance of the post
itself.
   After the initial encounter the thread develops into a pseudo-­conversation
where Sp34k is lectured by Amina and “Wolf ” on such subjects as dream
travel, New Age, nihilism, and religious education in primary school.51 The
characteristics found in the two posts analysed above is consistent with these;
Sp34k is using a lot of emoticons and codes from speech, while Amina is writ-
ing longer and more essayistic posts. Wolf is interjecting brief comments
(more like corrections) twice, in both instances referring to written materi-
als found online, namely Wikipedia and the FAQ on Satanic Forum’s website.
One gets the sense that Amina and Wolf are playing “good cop – bad cop”
with Sp34k, gently correcting his mistakes (such as mentioning out-of-body
experiences in the same breath as satanic rituals or claiming to have read New
Age’s website in the singular). It is here important to understand that different
message boards and discussion groups provide different degrees of freedom
– they produce different types of hybrid text, depending on such matters as
moderation and tacit rules within the group. A heavily moderated site results
in spellchecked and corrected posts similar to essays, while a less moderated
site results in messy posts filled with errors in grammar and spelling, emoti-
cons, and chat-style abbreviations similar to the immediacy of speech.52


 49. SFO, “Ritual=Styrke”. Posted 25 October 2005. My translation.
 50. The other answer on the same day, by “Zigma”, refers to a text from the group’s own maga-
     zine, Satanic Bulletin. The article in question is written by Amina.
 51. See the following eight posts, all from 26 October 2005, at SFO, “Ritual=Styrke”.
 52. See e.g. Connery, “IMHO”; Denzin, “Cybertalk”.


                                                                                         153
jesper aagaard petersen



   This relates to a core problem: whether traditional or virtual, both com-
munity and communication implies power, setting the issues of authority and
authenticity in the foreground of all engagements with virtual texts and vir-
tual populations. In her study of religious authority online, Heidi Campbell
discusses the necessity of understanding the asymmetric relations between
actors and religious hierarchy, structure, ideology and text when analys-
ing authority at play.53 Her empirical research indicates that “multiple layers
or perceptions of authority” have to be discerned, yet her understanding of
authority itself is curiously old-fashioned. For online hybrids and discursive
constructions of togetherness, Bruce Lincoln’s definition of authority as the
right to speak explicitly ties its presence to a dynamic and concrete instance of
authorization and trust.54 Thus, the right to speak is a structural process in a
symmetrical relation with persuasion and force and not an essential “thing”, a
process which merges the concepts of “power” and “community” as relational
authorization.55 A lot of elements indicate that Amina and Wolf ’s posts have
hegemonic or authoritative status, both when considering the formal charac-
teristics and the content. In addition, when moving beyond the posts them-
selves, the fact that they are both site administrators and moderators on the
board, both are members of Satanisk Forum (which is indicated by a banner
below the avatar) and both have posted extensively (2460 and 1117 posts for
Amina and Wolf, respectively, at the time of writing – that is about 30 per
cent of all posts on the board when combined) contribute to this conclusion.
On the other hand, Sp34k has joined the message board five days before his
inquiry, is not a member of the parent group, and has posted 102 times (about
1 per cent of all posts, which makes him an active member on the board – but
I will return to that below).
   This asymmetry of authority is further expressed in the marked differ-
ence between the “old guard” and new members. If we compare with other
threads on the message board such as “A Request to the Users” and “LaVey’s
‘The Satanic Rituals’”,56 we can categorize posters within diminishing roles of
status and power: administrators, active members of Satanisk Forum, active
non-members, inactive members, infrequent posters, “I have been issued
a warning”-debaters (indicated by another banner on the profile), and the
banned and expelled. But aside from the date of registration and membership
of the parent body all of these roles and positions of power are constituted
communicatively – they exist locally by the very fact that there is intentional
communication.

 53. Heidi Campbell, “Who’s Got the Power?”. See also the introduction to Dawson & Cowan,
     Religion Online, and Dawson, “Religion and the Quest for Virtual Community”, for more on
     virtual community and power.
 54. Lincoln, Authority, 10–11.
 55. Ibid., 4–6, 11. See also the distinctions presented in Lincoln, Discourse and the Construction
     of Society.
 56. See SFO, “En Anmodning til Brugerne”; SFO, “LaVey’s Sataniske Ritualer”.

154
                                                                          from book to bit