notion that esotericism came to be understood as something different from
Christianity in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and was then seen as
a subculture that had formulated alternatives to the Christian mainstream
from the Renaissance onwards. Esoteric currents were regarded as having
been suppressed as heretical by orthodox Christianity.22 Von Stuckrad ques-
tions this understanding of esotericism, and calls for an emphasis on the inter-
nal pluralism of Christianity, and the need to pay attention to the neglect of
non-Christian traditions in Western culture. He maintains that European his-
tory is characterized by transfers of meaning between different religious and
other systems like philosophical, philological and juridical systems, as well as
art and literature. Identities, not only in the modern age, were constructed
along the lines of fields of discourse, biographical narratives, and a tension
between inner and outer perception. For example, in early modern times
many Christians could easily pick up pantheistic thoughts or practices that
officially were regarded as heretical. In the history of Western esotericism we
find many personalities that can be described as junctions for the transfer of
religions and traditions.23
   Summarily, we might identify three themes that keep coming back in dif-
ferent kinds of perspectives on Western esotericism: dynamics of religious
change, the relationship between Western esotericism and mainstream/estab-
lished churches (or gnosis versus reason and faith), and inner experiences as
leading to gnosis or special esoteric knowledge (experience of transmutation,
experience of God and self, trance-like altered states of consciousness, etc.). I
will discuss these three themes further below, bringing them into discussion
with perspectives on contemporary religion more broadly.


STARK AND BAINBRIDGE’S THEORY OF RELIGION

Rodney Stark and William Sims Bainbridge have presented their general the-
ory of religion in several books and articles, the main ones being The Future of
Religion (1985) and A Theory of Religion (1987). Their theory highlights some
important issues concerning religion, religious change, and new religious
movements. In line with the points raised concerning the esotericism debate
above, I will especially focus on the parts of Stark and Bainbridge’s theory that
concern dynamics of religious change and tension with mainstream society.
The third theme of this chapter, inner experience leading to gnosis, will be dis-
cussed in the next section, in relation to Riis and Woodhead’s recent work on
religion and emotion.
   Stark and Bainbridge argue that secularization is a process found in parts
of all societies, together with a countervailing intensification of religion. The

 22. Ibid., 80.
 23. Ibid., 84–6.


                                                                             377
liselotte frisk



dominant religious organizations in any society become progressively more
“worldly” or more secularized. Secularization is, however, only one of three
fundamental and interrelated processes. One of the other two is religious
revival, as a demand for less worldly religion produces breakaway sect move-
ments. The second process is religious innovation, or the formation of new
religious traditions.24 Stark and Bainbridge call the schismatic movements,
which result from revivals within established religious organizations, sects.
The non-schismatic, deviant groups that represent either cultural innovation
or cultural importation they call cults. In the case of imported cults, the group
represents (or claims to represent) a well-established tradition from another
culture.25 But both sects and cults are deviant religious bodies – they are in a
state of relatively high tension with their surrounding socio-cultural environ-
ment. Stark and Bainbridge define tension with the surrounding socio-­cultural
environment as “subcultural deviance”, marked by difference, antagonism and
separation.26
   Cults are classified into three categories according to, among other crite-
ria, their degree of tension with the surrounding socio-cultural environment.27
The category of client cult is particularly relevant in connection to my case
study, Hälsogränden in Hedemora, and is therefore the only one discussed in
detail here.28 As I intend to make clear, it is also relevant for certain devel-
opmental traits of contemporary esotericism. Client cults are, according to
Stark and Bainbridge, characterized by “therapist–patient” or “consultant–cli-
ent” relationships, in place of “priest–congregation” or other types of social
organization more typical of religion. Client involvement is partial and non-
exclusive: the clients often retain an active commitment to another religious
movement or institution, or to other client cults.29 Client cults often compete
with medical and psychiatric services, and offer cures for specific physical and
emotional problems.30 Tension with the surrounding socio-cultural environ-
ment does not, according to Stark and Bainbridge, get really high until the
engagement is more intense than it can be in a client cult. The more radical
the movement, the more total the opposition.31


 24. Stark & Bainbridge, The Future of Religion, 2.
 25. The differentiation of sect and cult by Stark and Bainbridge has several differences com-
     pared to the most common ways to define these terms. See for example McGuire, Religion.
 26. I do not go further into these concepts here, which, in the terminology of Stark and
     Bainbridge, basically deal with interpersonal competition for scarce rewards. See Stark &
     Bainbridge, A Theory of Religion, 139–42.
 27. Stark & Bainbridge, The Future of Religion, 24–5.
 28. The other two are “audience cults” and “cult movements”. The degree of organization and
     the degree of tension with society is seen as lower in the audience cult than in the client
     cult, and higher in the cult movement.
 29. Stark & Bainbridge, The Future of Religion, 26–8.
 30. Ibid., 209.
 31. Ibid., 36.



378
                                                   a small - town health centre in sweden



   Stark and Bainbridge locate one possible reason for the innovation of cults
in inner experiences or visions. However, they seem to consider all kinds of
religious experiences as originating in psychopathology and being hallucina-
tions produced by either a sick mind or drugs.32 In order to get a better view of
the role of experience, I shall now turn to Riis and Woodhead’s recent “sociol-
ogy of religious emotion”.


RIIS AND WOODHEAD’S SOCIOLOGY OF EMOTION

In a recent book, Ole Riis and Linda Woodhead propose a perspective of
sociology of emotion.33 Although the multidimensional nature of religion has
often been noted,34 Riis and Woodhead argue that there has nevertheless been
an enduring bias towards the text- and belief-based approaches to religion.
They observe that the neglect of the emotional dimension reflects class, ethnic
and gender biases, and note that emotional labour often lies in the hands of
the least privileged in society.35 Emotion may thus help to produce, resist and
reproduce inequalities of power and status.36
   Riis and Woodhead claim that there are significant variations in the degree
to which different forms of religion are emotionally expressive,37 and also
which kinds of emotions are encouraged.38 At one extreme there are those
kinds of religion, including contemporary spirituality, that have as their aim
emotional improvement and transformation. The teachings and rituals of these
religious formations may be explicitly directed to specific emotional ends,39
while they authorize and sacralize subjective life.40 At the opposite extreme
are forms of religion that make little reference to emotions, and that down-
play emotional expression. Some of these may be strongly practice-based –
what matters is doing rather than feeling – whereas others are more oriented
to scholarly study and interpretation.41 For the contemporary religious land-
scape, Riis and Woodhead refer to several studies concluding that religious
groups emphasizing emotions are the most popular ones.42 They observe a
general trend whereby religion becomes more explicitly focused upon the


 32.   Ibid., 173–5.
 33.   Riis & Woodhead, A Sociology of Religous Emotion.
 34.   See e.g. Smart, Dimensions of the Sacred.
 35.   Riis & Woodhead, A Sociology of Religious Emotion, 3–4.
 36.   Ibid., 19.
 37.   Ibid., 13.
 38.   Ibid., 163.
 39.   Ibid., 13.
 40.   Ibid., 162.
 41.   Ibid., 13.
 42.   Ibid., 1.



                                                                                     379
liselotte frisk