a vast array of historicized occultural elements in which the current or lat-
est instance of knowledge or wisdom is just as valid as the oldest instance.
There is an expectation that the philosophia perennis extends into the future
as well as the past. In this way, iconoclasm is a valid interpretation of per-
ennialism because all instances of the tradition, in whatever form they may
appear, are valid. This not only validates the act of iconoclasm in the discourse
on perennialism but encourages it as reinterpretation of constructed tradi-
tions. Iconoclasm is the driving principle of this perennialism since the estab-
lished, conventional, or dogmatic must be challenged or even destroyed to
produce the next instance of knowledge or wisdom. This important point will
be returned to below.
   The perennialist impulse is demonstrated in a number of different ways
in the following examples from Chaos Magick. There is an affirmation of the
core similarities of magic across history and across cultures. References to the
figure of the shaman abound in these texts and are almost always made in
a transcultural and transhistorical sense.35 In Psychonaut, Carroll states that
“despite the enormous geographical separation between shamanic cultures,
they share almost identical methods”.36 Shamanism, understood as the origin
of magic, is an important part of the constructed tradition in the latter half of
the twentieth century. Kocku von Stuckrad has argued that the emergence of
the Western discourse of shamanism as a transcultural feature of religion at
this time has its roots in the late nineteenth century.37 However, the uses of
the shaman as a referent in the texts of Chaos Magick are not an appeal for a
return to nature but function almost solely for the purposes of garnering legit-
imacy by appealing to the ancient origin of magic. Versluis comments briefly
on this relation between tradition and shamanism in Chaos Magick.

      In this movement, the term initiation takes on the neoshamanic
      meaning of a period of trial and growth rather than an institu-
      tionalised series of hierarchic degrees … Chaos magic represents
      an anarchic and radical individualist mystico-magical move-
      ment that is by self-definition antitraditional, but that nonetheless
      draws from religious traditions and emphasizes transformations of
      consciousness.38



 35. For a thorough investigation of the universalized concept of the shaman see Znamenski,
     The Beauty of the Primitive.
 36. Carroll, Liber Null and Psychonaut, 169.
 37. Von Stuckrad, “Reenchanting Nature”; cf. the discussion in Chapter 2 of this volume. For
     a critical review of literature on modern shamanism see von Stuckrad, “Constructions,
     Normativities, Identities”, and for investigation into the Western construction of the sha-
     man see Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive.
 38. Versluis, Magic and Mysticism, 142.


100
                                                              perennialism and iconoclasm



One final point to make before discussing how ambivalent appeals to tradition
can legitimize innovation concerns the audience to whom these claims are
directed. In the first instance, are these appeals meant to confer legitimacy in
the eyes of the wider world and mainstream culture? Or are they designed to
grant legitimacy within a particular, specialized audience? Kennet Granholm
argues that:

      A distinctive trait of esotericism is that of imagined community. As
      per the non-intrinsic characteristic of concordance … an ­esoteric
      history of humanity is constructed, and through this imagined his-
      tory a cross-cultural and cross-historical community of esotericists
      is created. This imagined community grants the esotericist a feel-
      ing of belonging, even though he or she might be the only esoteri-
      cist in his or her community, lacking any contacts with other living
      practitioners.39

It is necessary to grasp this idea of “an imagined community of esotericists”40
in order to understand how the appeals to tradition change after the emer-
gence of Chaos Magick. In effect, the idea of tradition is constrained by the
existence of a community that is familiar with appealing to tradition in the
manner outlined in this chapter. Hanegraaff also points to the importance
of this idea in his entry “Tradition” in the Dictionary of Gnosis and Western
Esotericism, where he states:

      What characterizes the currents and authors treated here, how-
      ever, is precisely this sense of being part of a trans-historical “com-
      munity”, of which it is believed that all members would basically
      have agreed among one another, had they been able to meet.41

This consenting hegemony of perennialism among the community provides
the framework in which the appeals to tradition are made. One way of think-
ing about this audience is Christopher Partridge’s idea of “occulture”:

      Very briefly, occulture includes those often hidden, rejected and
      oppositional beliefs and practices associated with esotericism,
      theosophy, mysticism, New Age, Paganism, and a range of other


 39. Granholm, “The Sociology of Esotericism”, 791.
 40. It should also be noted here that the “imagined community of esotericists” is not now so
     imaginary, geographically speaking, as it would have been when considering the capacity
     for networking available to contemporary occultists. For a thorough treatment of online
     communities in this regard see Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, chapter 4,
     entitled “CyberSpirituality”, 135–64.
 41. Hanegraaff, “Tradition”, 1126.


                                                                                            101
colin duggan



      subcultural beliefs and practices, many of which are identified by
      Campbell as belonging to the cultic/mystical milieu and by Stark
      and Bainbridge as belonging to the occult subculture.42

The audience to which appeals for legitimacy are made will be constituted by
people who are interested in any or all of the elements outlined by Partridge.
This occultural audience engages in a consenting perennialism with respect to
constructed traditions. However, given the importance of subjectivity, indi-
viduals legitimize their own reinterpretations of these traditions through the
iconoclastic impulse. Iconoclasm is seen as a valid interpretation of peren-
nialism because all instances of the constructed tradition are valid. The next
instance will share the core features of the tradition no matter what form the
new instance takes. In this way, iconoclasm is the driving force of perennial-
ism in Chaos Magick, permitting radical subjectivity.


THE LEGITIMACY OF INNOVATION

There are two strategies involved in the legitimization of Chaos Magick
through an appeal to tradition. The first strategy is one where an appeal is
made to “the age of the tradition” with an emphasis on continuity. The second
strategy is an appeal to the most recent instance of a constructed tradition.
This involves claiming to be the next in a natural progression of innovations
that supersedes the previous one. With regard to the seminal authors, Carroll
and Sherwin, both strategies are used together. This serves as an establish-
ing, legitimizing act for Chaos Magick in general, positing it as the natural
successor in an age-old tradition of magic. The later author Phil Hine will be
included in the discussion as he shares Carroll and Sherwin’s position with
regard to these strategies. Authors who have sought to reinterpret Chaos
Magick and legitimize their own innovations have tended to opt for one or
other of the two strategies. Examples are Julian Wilde, who employs the first
of the strategies mentioned above, and Joel Biroco, who employs the second.
Wilde seeks to delegitimize, through iconoclasm, that which is seen to be the
predecessor of Chaos Magick (i.e. early twentieth-century occultism) and to
re-­emphasize the importance of a transhistorical and transcultural tradition
of magic by referring to shamanism. Biroco seeks to delegitimize the Chaos
Magick of others through iconoclasm and to re-emphasize the place of his
own version of Chaos Magick as the natural successor to Crowley’s occult-
ism. A sense of the way perennialism and iconoclasm interact in relation to a
constructed tradition is central to the deployment of these strategies of legiti-
macy. The three positions outlined here will now be discussed in detail.


 42. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 68. See also Chapter 6 of this volume.


102
                                                               perennialism and iconoclasm



Carroll, Sherwin and Hine