Anton LaVey loathed consumerism and conformism. The reasons concerned
agency and freedom. Echoing a tradition from nineteenth-century occultism’s
discouragement against leaving one’s will in the hand of others (e.g. mesmer-
ists), he said that a Satanist “should not allow himself to be programmed by
others”.31 Indeed, a true Satanist is a doer and “must be responsible for reaction
and change”,32 rather than being the one who reacts to and is being changed by
others. He abhorred “the masses”, and presented conspiracy theory as myth-
making for the masses. As myths they are necessary, “for they are essential to
man’s emotional needs”.33 That is, they are necessary to the kind of man who is
not a born Satanist. Yet LaVey clearly involved himself in conspiracy theory.34
   According to the ideology LaVey presents in The Satanic Bible, the strong
rule by nature. So how did Christianity, which he deemed a religion of the
weak, ascend to power in the Western world? How did the “herd” of weaklings
pull down the strong, push them to the side, and make “slave morality” the
law of society? Throughout his writings, but especially in The Satanic Bible
and other early texts, we find religion in the role of subjugating humans. This
comes complete with the conspiracy theorist’s notion of deliberate, conscious
agency behind the function. For instance, on the sinfulness of sex: “In order to
insure the propagation of humanity, nature made lust the second most pow-
erful instinct, the first being self-preservation. Realizing this, the Christian
Church made fornication the ‘Original Sin’.”35 This sorry state of affairs is the
result of manipulation by priestcraft, a conspiracy by the Christian cabal: “The
religionists have kept their followers in line by suppressing their egos.”36 This is
why Satan is “the best friend the church has ever had”.37 The threat of damna-
tion combined with suppression of natural tendencies manipulates their fol-
lowers – and the result is the rule of the weak and the suppression of vital life.
   This may look like any of a myriad of tales of a fight between powers of evil
and good in history, with darkness and light inverted towards a preference for
the material and self-related. It is that as well, but in a secularized version of
esoteric discourse, the secular text was itself “Magus” LaVey’s most powerful
form of magic. It is also a conscious use of history as mythology of the evils of
“spiritual” religion; LaVey’s tale of the history of repression should also be read
as an evocation, a call for a change of attitudes, for driving back harmful, life-
denying influences and taking control of vital life. Thus also his continued use


 31.   LaVey, The Devil’s Notebook, 63.
 32.   Ibid.
 33.   Ibid., 108.
 34.   See Dyrendal, “Hidden Persuaders and Invisible Wars”.
 35.   LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 47.
 36.   Ibid., 94.
 37.   Ibid., 25.


                                                                                    207
asbjørn dyrendal



of “secret history”, where LaVey marshals the rhetorical powers of simplistic
Christianity and turns it on its head:

        [I]f the love of money is the root of all evil; then we must at least
        assume the most powerful men on earth to be the most Satanic.
        This applies to financiers, industrialists, popes, poets, dictators,
        and all assorted opinion-makers and field marshals of the world’s
        activities.38

Satanism was a marginal, newly formed anti-religion, but he had it acquire a
powerful legacy by route of this imaginative feat:

        Occasionally, through “leakages,” one of the enigmatic men or
        women of earth will be found to have “dabbled” in the black arts.
        These, of course, are brought to light as the “mystery men” of his-
        tory. Names like Rasputin, Zaharoff, Cagliostro, Rosenberg and
        their ilk are links – clues, so to speak, of the true legacy of Satan …
        a legacy which transcends ethnic, racial and economic differences
        and temporal ideologies, as well. The Satanist has always ruled the
        earth … and always will, by whatever name he is called.39

In constructing a “true” lineage of Satanism LaVey mirrors and reinvents con-
spiracy culture’s lore: the powerful truly are Satanists.40 That is, however, a
good thing. Living life by satanic stratagems brings you success, and also
makes life richer.
   However, there is a dark side: If effective “black magic” works for Satanists,
then it works for anyone. That includes those who create culture and religion
for the masses. A true Satanist must avoid “the colorless existence of others”,41
but corporate interest and other forces are trying to mould everyone into
mindless consumers and worse. This is “the invisible war”:

        The skirmishes take place in the region of one’s own mind. The less
        one is aware of the invisible war, the more receptive one is to its
        ongoing process of demoralization, for the insensate human is vul-
        nerable, malleable and ripe for control.42

It is fought “with technologically advanced chemical and electromagnetic
weapons, crowd control, weather control and misdirection to mask the entire


 38.   Ibid., 104.
 39.   Ibid.
 40.   On this subject of “de facto Satanists”, see Chapter 4 of the present volume.
 41.   LaVey, Devil’s Notebook, 63.
 42.   LaVey, “The Invisible War”, 163.


208
                                                        hidden knowledge , hidden powers



operation”.43 Subliminal messages and other hidden control measures attempt
to deprive everyone of that “wondrous, unique experience”44 life should be.
Satanists should use their insight and “materialist magic” to make their own
subliminals instead, thus avoiding unwanted influences.
    This is no joke, but neither is it completely serious.45 LaVey plays with the
contents as well as the form of conspiracy theory, at times communicating
a tongue-in-cheek attitude towards belief, mocking what he deems excesses.
But LaVey’s play with conspiracy theory may also be seen to ­follow quite logi-
cally from, and relate strongly to, his conceptions of magic and agency. His
magical postulate that recipients of spells are most receptive while sleeping,46
for instance, is mirrored by his arguments that “subliminals” work best while
the recipient is asleep.47
    How does LaVey know all this? Related to the element of play, we should
not be at all certain that he always claims to know when he states something
as fact. Some statements are mockery, some balance on the metaphorical. But
largely – and although he frames Satanism as a religion demanding study, not
worship, and the satanic mindset as one that asks questions – his style does
not encourage doubt or deliberative reason. LaVey often leans toward the cat-
egorical statement or surprising observation, but tends to encourage little in
the way of argument. We saw one example above, formulated as a seemingly
argumentative “if-then” statement: “if the love of money is the root of all evil;
then we must at least assume the most powerful men on earth to be the most
Satanic”.48 In practice, this is a simple way of getting to a historically linked
conclusion by way of common morality discourse instead of through histori-
cal research. LaVey rarely appeals directly to academic research. More often,
he appeals in some way to his own, grounded, bodily experience. As noted by
Jesper Petersen, LaVey may appeal to science and reason, but “[i]n essence, it
is the experience of practical application or experiential authority that under-
girds LaVeyan scientism – science is true because it resonates with satanic
reasoning”.49 LaVey knows because it works: he, like Steiner, has experienced
it. But often even this element of grounding is missing and we are left with
the statement as revelation. The conspiracy against human agency may work
along the principles of black magic, but the connection is not made explicit
through argument.50 He declares and concludes. Filling in the gaps is for the
reader, who may, on closer reading, find seemingly simple statements to be
ambiguous, playful and sardonic.

 43.   Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 83.
 44.   LaVey, Devil’s Notebook, 63.
 45.   See Dyrendal, “Hidden Persuaders”.
 46.   LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 122.
 47.   LaVey, Satan Speaks!, 80.
 48.   LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 104.
 49.   Petersen, “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”, 85.
 50.   Most clearly in LaVey, “Invisible War”.


                                                                                    209
asbjørn dyrendal



“Seeing the fnords”: conspiracy theory and guerrilla enlightenment in Discordianism

If LaVey indulged in play with conspiracy theory more or less tongue-in-
cheek, Discordian play with conspiracy is both more and less serious. Less,
because in Discordian writing anything and everything is doubtful and laugh-
able; more, because conspiracy theory has for that very reason become an
important part of Discordianism as a religious path.
    Discordianism started as a mock religion around 1957, with Principia
Discordia as an anarchic, mock scripture devoted to Eris, the goddess of chaos.
It evolved in several stages, always keeping the anti-authoritarian elements of
“humour, mockery and parody”.51 These are also important to the Discordian
uses of conspiracy theory, which often cluster around secret societies, more
particularly the mythology about the Bavarian Illuminati.
    It starts already in the chaotic founding text, Principia Discordia, which
includes an “advert” for the “Bavarian Illuminati”:

             Founded by Hassan i Sabbah, 1090 ad (5090 al, 4850 am)
            Reformed by Adam Weishaupt, 1776 ad (5776 al, 5536 am)

               THE ANCIENT ILLUMINATED SEERS OF BAVARIA

                                      invite YOU to join

                The World’s Oldest and Most Successful Conspiracy52