The medieval Church … found itself saddled with the tradition that
      the working of miracles was the most efficacious means of dem-
      onstrating its monopoly of the truth. By the twelfth and thirteenth
      centuries the Lives of the Saints had assumed a stereotyped pat-
      tern. They related the miraculous achievements of holy men, and
      stressed how they could prophesy the future, control the weather,
      provide protection against fire and flood, magically transport heavy
      objects, and bring relief to the sick.37

 34. Ibid., 4.
 35. Alan D. Gilbert, The Making of Post-Christian Britain, 19.
 36. Jolly, Popular Religion in Late Saxon England, 170–71. See also Kieckhefer, Magic in the
     Middle Ages.
 37. Thomas, Religion and the Decline of Magic, 28. See also Jones & Pennick, History of Pagan
     Europe.

120
                                                               occulture is ordinary



Again, as Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke has noted, D. P. Walker’s landmark 1958
study, Spiritual and Demonic Magic from Ficino to Campanella, demonstrated
that “magic was part of the mainstream in the late fifteenth and sixteenth cen-
turies, closely connected with religion, music, mathematics, and medicine”.38
Likewise, B. J. Gibbons has shown that Western esotericism played a signifi-
cant cultural role in the emergence of the modern period.39 Indeed, whether
we explore, for example, Romanticism or the cult of the Gothic, during the
Enlightenment period there emerged, as Roy Porter has argued, a common
trade in stock elements:

      … the mist-shrouded castle, the villain sworn to the Devil,
      ghosts, spectres, sorcerers and witches, a flirting with the weird,
      the uncanny, the bizarre, with sado-masochistic sexuality – and,
      underpinning all, the Burkeian obsession with dread and the infi-
      nite unknown. Supernatural elements like spectralization triggered
      new sexual frissons; the old demonological themes of possession,
      incubi and succubi were eroticized … Such disciplines as alchemy,
      astrology and animal magnetism, and the fringes of physiognomy
      and phrenology evidently enjoyed a certain vogue.40

While many other studies might be cited, the point is that it is hardly a new
state of affairs that occulture is everyday, rather than the sole preserve of some
underground cultic milieu. While continuously flowing and changing in con-
tent, breadth and intensity, it is not primarily a subterranean phenomenon,
the ideas of which periodically emerge, filtered and proscribed, into the main-
stream. Of course, the notion of a cultic milieu does not necessarily contra-
dict occulture, in that occulture would help to account for the progress of the
cultic milieu and the mainstreaming of its ideas. Understood in this way, the
cultic milieu becomes just such an underground site of occultural coalescence,
a space in which esoteric and exotic ideas can be incubated. But that is only
one aspect of occulture.
   In order to unpack further the notion that occulture is ordinary, it is worth
quoting Williams at length, for the points he makes about culture can easily be
applied, with a little imagination and contextualization, to occulture:

      The making of a society is the finding of common meanings and
      directions, and its growth is an active debate and amendment
      under the pressures of experience, contact, and discovery, writ-
      ing themselves into the land. The growing society is there, yet is

 38. Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 5.
 39. Gibbons, Spirituality and the Occult.
 40. Roy Porter, “Witchcraft and Magic in Enlightenment, Romantic and Liberal Thought”,
     249–50.


                                                                                  121
christopher partridge



      also remade in every individual mind. The making of a mind is,
      first, the slow learning of shapes, purposes, and meanings, so that
      work, observation and communication are possible. Then, second,
      but equal in importance, is the testing of these in experience, the
      making of new observations, comparisons and meanings. A cul-
      ture has two aspects: the known meanings and directions, which
      its members are trained to; the new observations and meanings,
      which are offered and tested. These are the ordinary processes of
      human societies and human minds, and we see through them the
      nature of a culture; that it is always both traditional and creative;
      that it is both the most ordinary common meanings and the fin-
      est individual meanings. We use the word culture in these two
      senses: to mean a whole way of life – the common meanings; to
      mean the arts and learning – the special processes of discovery and
      creative effort. Some writers reserve the word for one or other of
      these senses; I insist on both, and on the significance of their con-
      junction. The questions I ask about culture are questions about our
      general and common purposes, yet also questions about deep per-
      sonal meanings. Culture is ordinary, in every society and in every
      mind.41

Occulture is likewise used to mean both a whole way of life and the special
processes of discovery and creative effort. Like Williams, I insist on both and
on the significance of their conjunction. The questions I ask about occulture
are questions about our general and common purposes, yet also questions
about deep personal meanings. Occulturally, special processes of discovery
and creative effort might include the ideas, practices and movements identi-
fied by Campbell, Kaplan and Lööw as belonging to the cultic milieu. However,
while occulture per se includes these, it is also “a whole way of life – the com-
mon meanings”.
   We have seen that, in contemporary civil societies in the post-industrial
West, there has been a decline of Christian hegemony, a distaste for defer-
ence to traditional authorities, such as the Church, and a turn within to the
subjective life. Since the 1960s this has been supported by growing affluence,
increased leisure time, the emergence and expansion of youth culture, and
the triumph of both democracy and capitalism. Moreover, if the making of
a society is, as Williams claims, “the finding of common meanings and direc-
tions, and its growth is an active debate and amendment under the pressures
of experience, contact, and discovery”, then it is also difficult to ignore the
roles of media and popular culture. That is to say, not only is popular cul-
ture increasingly important for the establishment of common meanings and


 41. Raymond Williams, “Culture is Ordinary”, 6.


122
                                                                        occulture is ordinary



directions, but, in so doing, it has significantly contributed to the growth
and significance of contemporary occulture. From the relatively mundane to
the bizarrely esoteric, from approaches to health and wellbeing to conspira-
cies relating world domination and apocalypse, popular culture disseminates
occultural content, creates synergies and encourages new spores of occultural
thought to emerge. These “new observations and meanings” are then incor-
porated into lifeworlds simply as presuppositions or as elements within par-
ticular systems of belief. To paraphrase Williams again, these are the ordinary
processes of human societies and human minds, and we see through them the
nature of occulture, both the most ordinary common meanings and the finest
individual meanings.
    Particularly interesting are the successes of conspicuously occultural books
and films such as Dan Brown’s The Da Vinci Code and Angels and Demons,
and films such as Roman Polanski’s The Ninth Gate.42 The Da Vinci Code,
for example, won “best book” in the 2005 British Book Awards;43 it has sold
more than 30 million copies in 40 languages, and Penguin Books have even
produced a guide to what I would describe as the occultural context of the
novel in its Rough Guides series.44 Indeed, as Stig Hjarvard has shown, The Da
Vinci Code, as mediatized spirituality, not only reflects, but stimulates alter-
native religious interest. In a Danish survey, “more than half of the respond-
ents report an increased interest in religious issues” after reading The Da Vinci
Code and Angels and Demons.45 As to the book’s occultural content, not only
is, for example, Wicca explicitly mentioned, but key neopagan themes, such
as Goddess Worship, are prominent, as are discussions of popular and sub-
culturally trendy symbols, such as the pentacle, practices such as the Tarot,
and romanticized rituals such as the hieros gamos.46 This contemporary every-
day interest in popular occultism, reflected in The Da Vinci Code’s enormous
success, is, again, not simply reserved for fiction, but is also evident in the
fact that the percentage of esoteric books published since 1930 has more than
doubled: in 1930 occult books constituted 7 per cent of religious books pub-
lished. This gradually rose to 17 per cent in 1990, dipped to 11 per cent in 1995
and rose again to 15 per cent in 2000.47 Again, Elizabeth Puttick has recently
observed that there has been

        an explosion of holistic ideas and practices into the mainstream
        … Mind-body-spirit publishing has expanded from a specialist
        niche to the fastest growing non-fiction genre in a multinational,


 42.   See Partridge, “The Occultural Significance of The Da Vinci Code”.
 43.   BBC, “Da Vinci Code Wins Top Book Award”.
 44.   Haag & Haag, Rough Guide to The Da Vinci Code.
 45.   Hjarvard, “The Mediatization of Religion”, 22.
 46.   Dan Brown, Da Vinci Code, 42, 43, 59–62, 129, 172, 409–10.
 47.   Brierley, “Religion”, 666–7.


                                                                                         123
christopher partridge



      multimedia industry. This growth contrasts with traditional reli-
      gious publishing, which is in decline. In the process, the most
      successful spiritual authors have become both gurus and global
      brands.48