How, then, are we to grasp this proliferation of antagonistic inclusions and
exclusions of Satanism online? Specifically, is there any validity to the unsub-
stantiated “large, heterogeneous online community” postulated by Chris
Mathews, echoing the inclusivist assertions of Venus Satanas and Corvis
Nocturnum above?29 The temptation to appropriate an emic term and talk
about a “satanic community” or “movement”, understood as a broad hetero-
geneous social trajectory much like the “black” or “gay” community, should
be anchored in empirical fact, as shown by the conflict between inclusive and
exclusive viewpoints.
    A starting point for analysis could be a representative list, which in essence
charts a selection of observable groups and sites. What is possible online,
though, is to utilize various free “webometric” meta-tools to expand the basic
list with additional information. The very idea of a milieu is show-casing the
interplay between abstract deterritorialized spaces within global flows of
occulture, and local reterritorializations of the milieu, fixing flows in intelligi-
ble localities. The Internet has much value in mapping both, and I have used
three meta-communicative tools to answer three relevant questions:

   • Who was responsible and when was the site established?
   • How popular is the site and what is its reputation in the milieu?
   • Who is connected to whom?

The first list (see Table 7.1) provides basic registration data (date, registrant,
and/or domain) for some well-known groups as well as relative newcom-
ers and obscure sites. While I have tried to be representative, the countless
offerings necessitate a selection based on more impressionistic criteria. After
compiling the list, I have used the website Europe Registry’s WHOIS domain

     pre-Internet “Satanic Bunco Sheet” in Barton, The Church of Satan, 125–8. For an updated
     form, see Church of Satan, “Satanic Bunco Sheet” (briefly analysed in Petersen, “Binary
     Satanism”, 600–601).
 29. Mathews, Modern Satanism, 91.


                                                                                        141
jesper aagaard petersen


Table 7.1 Registration data for a selection of satanic/Left-Hand Path websites.

Domain name                                  Registration Registrant (if applicable) and/or
                                             date         domain server (if relevant)
The Undercroft and Letters to the Devil –    1996          L. Ventrue/
both hosted by www.satannet.com                            NS3.ninethirteen.com
                                                           NS1.ninethirteen.com

Church of Satan (Anton S. LaVey) –           1997          Peter H. Gilmore/
www.churchofsatan.com                                      Central9.ninethirteen.com
                                                           NS9.ninethirteen.com

Temple of Set (Michael Aquino) –             1997          Robert Menschel/
www.xeper.org and www.templeofset.org                      NS1.Xeper.org + NS2.Xeper.org

First Satanic Church (Karla LaVey) –         1998          None* (FSC International)
www.satanicchurch.com

First Church of Satan (John Allee) –         1998          John Allee
www.churchofsatan.org

The 600 Club – www.the600club.com            1998          None* (The 600 Club)

Purging Talon – www.purgingtalon.com         1999          Matt Paradise

NocTifer’s Real Satanism site –              1999          Nagasiva Yronwode
www.satanservice.org

Radio Free Satan –                           2000          Shane Bugbee
www.radiofreesatan.com

Temple of the Vampire –                      2000          None* (TOTV)/
www.vampiretemple.com                                      Central9.ninethirteen.com
                                                           NS9.ninethirteen.com

Vexen Crabtree’s Description,                2001          Simon Crabtree
Philosophies and Justification of Satanism
site – www.dpjs.co.uk

Satanisk Forum – www.sataniskforum.dk        2001          A. O. Lap

Diane Vera’s Theistic Satanism site –        2005          Diane Vera (Church of Azazel)
www.theisticsatanism.com

Joy of Satan – www.joyofsatan.org (also      2005          Andrea Dietrich (Maxine
hosted on www.angelfire.com/empire/          (2003)†       Dietrich)/
serpentis666)                                              NS1.joyofsatan.org
                                                           NS2.joyofsatan.org

Modern Church of Satan –                     2006          None*
www.modernchurchofsatan.com



142
                                                                                from book to bit


Domain name                                      Registration Registrant (if applicable) and/or
                                                 date         domain server (if relevant)
Stephen E. Flowers’s Rûna Raven                  2006           Stephen E. Flowers
newsletter and community –
www.edred.net

Temple of the Black Light –             2007                    None*
www.templeoftheblacklight.net/main.html

Venus Satanas’s Theistic Satanism and            2007           Venus Satanas
Magick site – www.spiritualsatanist.com

Satanic Reds (Tani Jantsang ) –                  2009‡          Johnni Pedersen (J. Nymann)
www.satanicreds.org
* “None” refers to registrants with high privacy settings, which affect searches.
†www.joyofsatan.com links directly to the angelfire website, as does most of the material on the
joyofsatan.org site.
‡ Satanic Reds recently moved from a geocities address – the group’s online birth is around 1997
(see Satanic Reds, “The Roots of the Satanic Reds”; Lap and Wolf, “Satanismens Danske Rødder”, 14).
Source: based on information collected from http://whois.europeregistry.com/displayWhois.php on
15 November 2010.



search to access domain registrars for information.30 Although the results are
unsurprising, this method fixes the sites in time and place, something seldom
given in the “here and now” of online production.
   What do we learn? First, Internet Satanism predates 1996, but mainly as a
text-based phenomenon. With the World Wide Web and the graphics-based
web browsers introduced around 1993, usage gradually shifted from text to
hypertext and image. We can see how the Church of Satan and the Temple of
Set, as well as offshoots and affiliates, purchased domain names from the mid-
1990s to establish a graphics-based online presence. The earliest community
sites and message boards, satannet.com and the 600 club, were in place before
1998 as well. Of course, a given start date does not guarantee activity, just as a
given registration date is not an absolute start date; for example, the Church of
Satan existed on www.coscentral.net/cos for at least two years before actually
launching the present address. Conversely, the Satanic Reds had a geocities
address for a decade before “upgrading”.
   Second, turning to registrants, the geographical distribution is predomi-
nantly American, but this is an artefact of both the Californian birthplace of
modern Satanism and my sampling bias. Most names are well known in the
milieu. Apart from providing email addresses and even offline addresses in
some cases, a registrant search is helpful when following linkages between

 30. See http://whois.europeregistry.com/displayWhois.php. In some cases I have cross-
     checked with www.betterwhois.com and www.whois.com, but neither work on non-­
     American sites.


                                                                                                143
jesper aagaard petersen



groups by biography, although, again, a given registrant is no guarantee for
continued affiliation or the presence of large numbers. In the case of domain
servers, many different websites are hosted on individual servers. Nevertheless,
the Church of Satan, the Temple of Set and the Joy of Satan operate with
name-specific domain servers; we can use this to see, for example, that the
Church of Satan actually hosts the Undercroft, Letters to the Devil and the
Temple of the Vampire, reinforcing the feeling of connection between these
sites.31
    Next, to gauge the respectability and popularity both within the milieu
and in general, I have entered the same domains into Alexa’s Web informa-
tion database.32 The list (Table 7.2) is sorted by traffic rank, a number “based
on three months of aggregated historical traffic data from millions of Alexa
Toolbar users and data obtained from other, diverse traffic data sources”.33
By combining daily visitors and quarterly page views, the number gives us a
clue to the relative popularity of the site over time compared to simple lists of
unique page views. Nevertheless, data on sites with a traffic rank over 100,000
are not entirely trustworthy, which applies to all the satanic and Left-Hand
Path sites measured here. The only sites with some popularity are the Church
of Satan and (somewhat paradoxically) Joy of Satan’s page base on the angel-
fire network, and they are still very far from Scientology or YouTube. Most of
these sites are decidedly “fringe”.
    Similarly, the number of links to sites is wildly imprecise, as Alexa only
counts links “from sites visited by users in the Alexa traffic panel. Links that
were not seen by users in the Alexa traffic panel are not counted”.34 Accordingly,
the numbers seem quite low. For this reason I have done another search on
Yahoo’s site explorer, providing “inlink” data that seems intuitively more cor-
rect. Both these inlinks and Alexa’s link numbers are from diverse sources,
from Wikipedia and Facebook to other satanic sites, making the data some-
what complicated to use uncritically. Nonetheless, used heuristically the rela-
tions between the sites do say something significant about relative strength,
network building, and authority whether we are working with one or the other
data set. We could call it a reputation or saturation indicator. The Church of
Satan scores high on both searches, indicating a stable network to this site.
Anomalies include Vexen Crabtree’s site, The Joy of Satan, the Temple of the

 31. Additional information on the issue of servers can be found on RobTex’s Domain Name
     System search at www.robtex.com/dns.
 32. www.alexa.com.
 33. Alexa, “About the Alexa Traffic Rankings”. I have chosen traffic rank over the more intui-
     tively understandable “unique visitors” and “site views” stats from e.g. www.siteanalytics.
     com because of this aggregate nature – by combining quarterly and daily activity, a rela-
     tively stable number or rank is reached, which is all I need for comparison between my
     chosen sites.
 34. I quote from the small drop-down explanation window next to the number. See also Alexa,
     “Sites Linking In”.


144
                                                                         from book to bit