that Naess’s Bucharest formulation, which later developed into Ecosophy T
(named after Tvergastein, Naess’s mountain hut), formed the ontological bed-
rock of DE theorizing, and further undergirded the claims made within the
manifesto. DE’s North American architects adamantly argued against con-
flating Naess’s ecosophy with Deep Ecology and countered by stating that the
meaning of Deep Ecology was to be found in the ecocentric, yet ontologically
and “philosophically neutral” manifesto.13
    Complicating matters further, Naess rejected all attempts to define Deep
Ecology qua Deep Ecology. Instead, he insisted on his initial use of the term as
a typological description of a pluralistic movement that could not be defined
by any manifesto or distinct philosophical or religious worldview. Naess
argued further that if Deep Ecology could be defined apart from the diverse
movement, it was to refer to the formation of an ecosophy through a four-tier
methodological system he called “normative derivation”. As his interpretation
of Deep Ecology regarded (as definitive) neither the authority of the manifesto,
nor the claim that his own ecosophy articulated DE’s ontology, Naess, along
with critics and supporters, have continued to debate the question “what is
Deep Ecology?” with scant conciliatory success. The endless and increasingly
fruitless debate over this question has transformed DE into a ubiquitous, if not
entirely ambiguous element in “radical environmentalism”, leading one com-
mentator to describe it as “a vague, formless, self-contradictory, invertebrate
thing” and another to the conclusion that DE “has more interpretations than
the Bible”.14


DEEP ECOLOGY WITHIN THE STUDY OF WESTERN ESOTERICISM

Among a plethora of references to bioregionalism, Buddhism and Taoism,
there is within DE an abundance of rituals, discourses and figures that belong
to the field of Western esotericism. To name only a handful, “New Age sci-
ence” luminaries Fritjof Capra and Ken Wilber both participate as agents in
DE, the former as an outspoken proponent and the latter as a critical inter-
locutor.15 Further, references to Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis and the “New
Physics” of David Bohm are far from rare in the milieu. Moreover, the most
prominent ritual in DE, Joanna Macy and John Seed’s neoshamanic “Council
of All Beings”, consists of channelling intermediate beings, including nature
spirits, spokes-entities for extinct animals, and Gaia herself, in order to elicit


 13. Sessions, Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, 190.
 14. Bookchin, “Social Ecology versus Deep Ecology”; Chase, “The Great Green Deep-Ecology
     Revolution”, 166.
 15. See Capra’s contribution to Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, entitled “Deep Ecology: A
     New Paradigm”, and Wilber, A Brief History of Everything, 39, 329; Wilber, Sex, Ecology, and
     Spirituality, 106.


                                                                                            291
joseph christian greer



higher knowledge for the participants involved.16 Most tellingly, there is the
work of the Church of Deep Ecology, which openly embraces a neopagan
form of nature worship in their efforts to evangelize Sessions’s interpretation
of Deep Ecology. Add to this the neopagan lexicon employed in the work of
Deep Ecology writer, Wiccan high priest and neoshamanic practitioner Gus
diZerega, it should come as no surprise that a number of scholars have been
led to categorize DE as either derivative of esotericism or as a new religious
movement in itself.17
    The aforementioned examples often act as red herrings for scholars look-
ing to prove that Deep Ecology is a manifestation of Western esotericism.
The problem with characterizing DE with regard to these esoteric elements
relates back to the general trend of defining Deep Ecology in the singular and
according to a selection of self-serving evidence. Describing Deep Ecology
as definitively anything, but especially esoteric, glosses over the discrepancy
between the interpretations and the truth-claims therein. The work of the
prime movers in DE, like Sessions, illustrates this point perfectly, for he for-
tifies his interpretation of Deep Ecology – which scholars argue is the most
widely accepted in the milieu18 – with a wholehearted rejection of any claim
that links Deep Ecology to the New Age movement or the occult; in point of
fact, he likens the association to “cheap shots”.19 An accurate understanding
of how the aforementioned esoteric elements fit into DE can only be formed
when they are analysed in relation to how they covertly assume some aspect of
the interpretations of Deep Ecology and disregard others. Analysis of this sort
not only transforms what appears to be miscellaneous esoteric flotsam into
specific articulations of particular interpretations of Deep Ecology, but more
importantly, provides a more precise understanding of contemporary esoteric
discourses.
    Kocku von Stuckrad articulates the key methodological point for study-
ing DE in light of both its interpretational plurality and the esoteric ­elements

 16. See Seed et al., Thinking Like a Mountain; Bron Taylor, “Earth and Nature-Based Spirituality
     (Part II)”, 229.
 17. Bron Taylor presents the strongest argument for understanding Deep Ecology in toto as
     a religion unto itself, or in his words, a “dark green religion”. See Bron Taylor, “Ecological
     Resistance Movements”; Bron Taylor, Dark Green Religion, 293n45. In many ways antici­
     pating Taylor’s work, Catherine Albanese’s work on “nature religion” similarly describes
     Deep Ecology as a religious worldview. Albanese, Nature Religion, 176.
 18. Admittedly, the veracity of his claim is impossible to ascertain; however, there is a con-
     sensus among scholars which Harold Glasser articulates saying, “[s]upporters of the deep
     ecology movement are not united by a commitment to deep ecology as an academic
     ecophilosophy (which they may be familiar with or embrace), but with their willingness
     to endorse the eight-point deep ecology platform, prepared by Naess and Sessions in
     1984”. Glasser, “Series Editor’s Introduction”, xxxviii. See also Fox, Toward a Transpersonal
     Ecology, 114–118; Katz et al., Beneath the Surface, x; Bron Taylor, “Deep Ecology and Its
     Social Philosophy”, 269n28–29.
 19. Sessions, “Deep Ecology and the New Age”, 290.


292
                                  deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



within it. This point concerns the nature of Western esotericism itself: “‘Eso­
teric­ism’ as object matter does not exist; ‘esotericism’ is a construction of
scholars who order phenomena in a way that they ﬁnd suitable to analyse
processes of Western history of culture”.20 Accordingly, the study of contempo-
rary esotericism is not confined to a tradition of esotericism that has survived,
relatively intact, throughout the ages, nor is an attempt to trace a tradition
as it continually undergoes radical reinvention. The reason for this is that no
such tradition exists, etically speaking.21 Without objective criteria that could
be used to organize select historical currents under the rubric of esotericism,
von Stuckrad rightly argues that the term is best understood as a structural
element of Western culture that cuts across art, science and religion, and in so
doing draws together similar discourses across cultural fields. Constructed to
provide a framework for analysis and not a universal definition of esotericism,
von Stuckrad’s approach leads to the conclusion that “it is often better to talk
about the esoteric rather than esotericism, because the esoteric is an element of
cultural processes, while mention of esotericism suggests that there is a coher-
ent doctrine or clearly identified body of tradition”.22 Hence, the question is not
“is DE a form of contemporary Western esotericism?” but rather, “what part
of which interpretations of Deep Ecology do the esoteric elements presume?”
    Understood as a structural element of discourse, von Stuckrad describes
the “esoteric” in terms of a claim of a higher form of knowledge, which addi-
tionally possesses the means of accessing it.23 Elaborating on this quality, he
states that such discourses frequently employ a “rhetoric of a hidden truth,
which can be unveiled in a specific way and established contrary to other
interpretations of the universe and history – often that of the institutional
majority”.24 He adds that such a “claim to knowledge is often combined with
an emphasis on individual experience, wherein a seeker attains higher knowl-
edge through extraordinary states of consciousness”, which usually function in
conjunction with “a conception of the cosmos, which one can call holistic or
monistic”.25 The concept of living nature and perennial philosophy are also sin-
gled out as common to esoteric worldviews. While disparate, the three most
prominent interpretations of Deep Ecology do indeed intersect these crite-
ria to varying degrees; however, that is not to say that they are all esoteric in
the same way or even sufficiently esoteric to merit study as such.26 Through

 20. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88.
 21. For a fuller engagement with the problem of “tradition” see von Stuckrad, Locations of
     Knowledge, 25–43; Hanegraaff, “Tradition”; Lewis & Hammer, The Invention of Sacred
     Tradition. Cf. Chapter 2 of the present volume.
 22. Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.
 23. Ibid., 9–11; von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88–93.
 24. Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.
 25. Ibid., 10–11.
 26. As the most comprehensive scholarly index in the field, The Dictionary of Gnosis and
     Western Esotericism serves as a useful gauge to ascertain which currents and figures


                                                                                      293
joseph christian greer



analysing each interpretation according to the idiosyncratic relationship they
have to these criteria, scholarship on DE will be able to move beyond the mis-
leadingly wholesale characterization of the milieu as either esoteric or not.
   Considering the foregoing framework for analysis, applying the analytical
instrument of esotericism to DE produces two effects. The first effect is prag-
matic, as Wouter Hanegraaff relates: