turned their back on a golden dawn and have flown instead to
      the ­rainbow-jagged darkness of Vajrana (the tantric-gnostic
      Shambala), those with jaded magickal appetites, those who wish
      to live in their own universe and not in someone else’s – this is for
      you in the fond hope that it will inspire/encourage you enough to
      sweetly/awe-fully disturb your magic and your life.61

Wilde is attempting to gain legitimacy for his emphasis on the importance
of fictional works in Chaos Magick. He wants innovation itself to become an
inherent part of what Chaos Magicians do. Liberating Chaos Magick from
the organizing forces of early twentieth-century occultism and focusing on
the inherently innovative and free shaman of his construction are the changes
Wilde makes with regard to the perceived tradition of magic.


Biroco

Joel Biroco was heavily involved in the debates about theory and practice in
Chaos Magick through the pages of CHAOS (later KAOS) magazine. He uses
the second strategy only by placing himself and his version of Chaos Magick
as the next instance in the natural progression of “the magical tradition”. There
are practically no references to an ancient tradition of magic and no empha-
sis on the shaman as the origin of this tradition. He appeals only to the most
recent predecessor of Chaos Magick in the perennialized tradition, Thelema.
He seeks to legitimize his innovation which he calls the “156 current” and
delegitimize all other types of Chaos Magick. Even though his appeal for
legitimacy is based on being the next instance of the magical tradition and is
directly linked with Thelema, he makes sure that Thelema is also delegitimized
by referring to it and Chaos Magick as “nostalgia currents”:

      I regard the 156 current as an essentially underground current
      of frontline occultism and the true successor to what was the 93
      current of Thelema (now another nostalgia current) and also the
      Chaos current, both outmoded by KAOS-BABALON yet fore-
      shadowed in both.62

KAOS-BABALON is another name for the “156 current” and is so named to
mark this type of Chaos Magick as his interpretation. The significance of the
numbers comes from employing gematria, a system of assigning numerical
values to letters and words widely used by Aleister Crowley. In this case 93 is


 61. Ibid., 10.
 62. Biroco, KAOS 14, 11.


110
                                                         perennialism and iconoclasm



equivalent to Thelema and 156 is equivalent to KAOS-BABALON. Biroco is
drawing a direct line from Crowley’s Thelema to his version of Chaos Magick
and disregarding other types of Chaos Magick almost entirely. Biroco uses
another strategy to seek legitimacy for his version of Chaos Magick from the
community of interested parties:

      I instigated KAOS-BABALON or “156 current”, which I had been
      working on in the background as a truly “occult” (hidden) current,
      regarding Babalon as having occult identity with Chaos, essentially
      being female and male counterparts. It turned the Chaos current
      into a hard-edged and dark sex magick current.63

Here, he is claiming his innovation to be authentic and legitimate because it is
hidden, and in the previous quote it is described as underground. The opera-
tive ideas here are secrecy and popularization. Biroco’s claim that his “156 cur-
rent” has been hidden is to allude to its being secret and therefore authentic.
As von Stuckrad states:

      The idea of higher knowledge is closely linked to a discourse of
      secrecy, albeit not because esoteric truths are restricted to an
      “inner circle” of specialists or initiates but because the dialectic of
      concealment and revelation is a structural element of secretive dis-
      courses. Esoteric knowledge is not so much elitist as hidden.64

Biroco’s emphasis on the hidden, underground nature of his innovation also
functions as a rejection of the popularization of Chaos Magick. Biroco sees
popularization as a dilution of Chaos Magick. His reference to “frontline
occultism” suggests that other versions of Chaos Magick are distracted from
the primary goal of occultism. This emphasis on complete commitment to
magic is another example of the influence of Crowley on Biroco’s ideas.


CONCLUSION

Through ambivalent appeals to tradition, Chaos Magicians have legitimized
their own innovations of the already-established types of Chaos Magick.
Chaos Magicians are not attempting to convince a wide audience of the legiti-
macy of their claims. However, they knowingly engage in creation and inno-
vation while directing their appeals for legitimacy at a select audience who
share perennialism about traditions of magic. There is an acceptance among

 63. Ibid., 10. See Crowley, “The Vision and the Voice” for the source of Biroco’s KAOS-
     BABALON.
 64. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88–9.


                                                                                   111
colin duggan



this occultural audience that construction of tradition and appealing to that
tradition for legitimacy are constituents of late twentieth-century occultism.
Chaos Magicians do not have to claim to have found an unpublished text by
a revered author. They have no single religious leader. They are fully aware of
the plurality of individualisms that make up Chaos Magick. Innovation and
creativity are encouraged as products of the dynamic that exists between con-
ceptions of perennialized, constructed traditions of magic and the call to icon-
oclasm. In the knowledge that traditions are constructed and can be appealed
to in different ways at different times, iconoclasm acts as a valid interpreta-
tion of perennialism. This creates a space within which the individualism of
­twentieth-century occultism coincides with the perennialism of the occultural
 audience. The appeal to tradition is only one of the ways Chaos Magicians
 seek legitimacy. There is plenty of scope for a proper exploration of the way
 science is used to describe and legitimize how Chaos Magick works. The the-
 ory behind Chaos Magick is another point of contention for practitioners.
 Appeals to the science of chaos theory for legitimacy form a major part of
 the writings on Chaos Magick, and offer an interesting and complex focus for
 future research.




112
chapter 6

OCCULTURE IS ORDINARY
Christopher Partridge




While Western esotericism has its roots in the Hellenistic world of the first
few centuries of the Common Era, and while much contemporary eso-
teric thought can be traced back to the rediscovery of early texts during the
Renaissance (and, particularly, to the modern occult revival of the nineteenth
century), the late modern period since the 1960s has witnessed the emergence
of a political and cultural context that has proved particularly conducive to the
proliferation of broadly esoteric ideas. Indeed, no longer can such thought be
considered occulted or esoteric, in the sense of being recondite and secretive.
While there are, of course, occult traditions and organizations that are styled
as such, concerned with the cultivation of a sense of gnostic privilege, the cul-
ture in which they are embedded is no longer hidden or unfamiliar. It is ordi-
nary and everyday.
   The well-documented shift from “religion” to “spirituality”,1 the turn to the
self, the change of focus from external authority to inner experience has sig-
nificantly increased the appeal and respectability of esotericism. Indeed, such
has been the change in the oc/cultural climate that, not only is there wide-
spread popular interest in magic and occultism, but students can now study
for degrees in esotericism at some European universities.2 This ­chapter is


   1. See Woodhead & Heelas, The Spiritual Revolution; Heelas, Spiritualities of Life; Partridge,
      Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1.
   2. For example, there is a “Center for History of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents”
      at the University of Amsterdam, and Exeter University has established the “Exeter
      Centre for the Study of Esotericism”. There are also several learned societies, notably, the
      “European Society for the Study of Western Esotericism”, the “Association for the Study
      of Esotericism”, the “Society for the History of Alchemy and Chemistry”, and “Societas
      Magica”. There are also a number of academic journals devoted to the study of the subject:
      Aries: Journal for the Study of Western Esotericism; Esoterica; Gnostika; Ambix; and Magic,
      Ritual and Witchcraft.


                                                                                             113
christopher partridge



about this new climate. That is to say, rather than providing an analysis of, for
example, particular esoteric traditions or organizations, the following discus-
sion is primarily concerned with exploring the social and cultural conditions,
the occultural context within which contemporary esotericism thrives.


OCCULTURE IN LATE MODERN SOCIETIES