e­ soteric notions and quasi-esoteric symbolism into its ideology and visual
 expressions. A key concern for the radical right is religious and cultural pres-
 ervation and resurrection. These ideas are often directly coupled to esoteric
 notions and politicized neopaganism, as well as attacks against Christianity,
 which is perceived as being the cause of the decline and degeneration of the
 modern age and the attendant promulgation of its values of liberalism, capital-
 ism and egalitarianism.10
     This chapter explores the origins and provides examples of transfers of eso-
teric notions within the political right, and examines explanations that might
help us understand such transfers. This chapter is not the first to deal with
examples of overlaps between esotericism and the right. The origins of the
anti-modern movements from which right-wing esotericism springs can argu-
ably be placed as far back as the so-called Counter-Enlightenment.11 The con-
temporary movements of right-wing esotericism have already been explored
by scholars such as Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke, Jocelyn Godwin and Mattias
Gardell.12 What is lacking in these studies, which primarily document the
existence of these groups and describe the ideas they promote, are attempts
to provide answers as to why we see such an overlap between esotericism and
the right. The aim in this chapter is to do precisely that.
     The first part of the chapter introduces contemporary anti-modern intel-
lectuals, specifically the European New Right, Radical Traditionalism and
Eurasianism. The second part looks at the historical relationship between
radical politics and esotericism. It also presents examples of overlaps between
esotericism and the radical right, and political adaptation of esoteric symbol-
ism and ideological and mythical complexes, such as the Black Sun symbol
and the idea of a primordial homeland, such as Thule or Atlantis. The third
and final part of this chapter examines some of the more fundamental and
theoretical questions and provides possible explanations. What kind of struc-
tural and ideological similarities exist between the radical right and esoteri-
cism? Is the radical right simply another form of countercultural cultic milieu,
engaging in polemical discourses against the mainstream, and constructing its
own “grand polemical narratives”, or are there other and more deep-rooted
reasons for such an overlap?


AN INTRODUCTION TO THE RADICAL RIGHT

Before going into a more detailed examination of contemporary bonds
between esotericism and the radical right, let us first look at what the radical

 10. A good example of Evola’s anti-Christian viewpoints and his (neo)pagan alternative can be
     found in Evola, Heathen Imperialism.
 11. Berlin, “The Counter-Enlightenment”.
 12. Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun; Godwin, Arktos; Gardell, Gods of the Blood.


246
                                               radical politics and political esotericism



right is. The term “radical right” is in this article used as an overarching term
denoting various groups that are all fundamentally in opposition to the cur-
rent society, seeking a grand-scale societal transformation, and hence revolu-
tionary in nature. We have already briefly mentioned historical examples such
as the völkisch movement and the Traditionalist movement, but for the pur-
pose of this article let us look in more detail at contemporary examples.
   Radical Traditionalism is the newest iteration of the ideas present in
Traditionalism and the New Right. The Radical Traditionalists are best known
for their journal Tyr, edited and published by Joshua Buckley and Michael
Moynihan, where the movement is described as a rejection of modern val-
ues and the materialist “reign of ‘quantity over quality’”.13 They deplore what
they consider a decline and absence of spiritual values, and the lack of true
concern for the environment. Instead of modern progressivism they hail the
re-­emergence of homogeneous tribal societies as a (neo)pagan and anti-
modern alternative to contemporary society.14 The Radical Traditionalists
have successfully attracted interest and support from several scholars,15 and
achieved success in spreading Radical Traditionalism to a broader audience.
However, the movement has existed for less than a decade and is still a minor
constellation in the overall subculture of the radical right.
   In order to understand the groups and ideas labelled the “New Right”, it
is necessary to first give some fundamental clarifications and definitions of
terms. The necessity of this is made acute by the fact that more conventional
connotations of the term “right”, associated with a classical political left–right
axis, do not properly fit the New Right groups. The left has ­historically been
associated with the promotion of social equality through the promotion of
collective rights, and it has been put in opposition to more individualistic,
liberal ideas about the free market and private property. That the New Right
actually promotes collective rights, albeit not egalitarianism, while at the same
time opposing liberalism and capitalism makes the preconceived notions we
might have of the left and right invalid.
   Giving a clear-cut definition of the New Right is quite difficult as it incor-
porates heterogeneous groups and persons throughout Europe, such as the
Nouvelle Droite in France whose main exponents are Alain de Benoist and
Guillaume Faye, and the Neue Rechte in Germany with representatives such
as Pierre Krebs and Karlheinz Weißmann. French commentator Pierre Vial
has identified five distinct ideological elements that constitute main influences
and strands of thought in the New Right, and Michael O’Meara has added a


 13. See Tyr, “Tyr”.
 14. For a more detailed exposition of Radical Traditionalism see Senholt, “Radical Tradition­
     alism and the New Right”.
 15. This includes contributions in the journal by scholars of Western esotericism such as
     Joscelyn Godwin and Christopher McIntosh. See also Senholt, “Radical Traditionalism and
     the New Right”.


                                                                                         247
jacob christiansen senholt



sixth to these. This list is a good starting point for a working definition. The six
elements are:

      1) The Anti-modern traditionalism of René Guénon and Julius
         Evola, influencing the Right since the early twentieth century
      2) Völkisch and communitarian nationalism focusing on continen-
         tal identity
      3) Neopaganism as opposition to the Judaeo-Christian heritage,
         stressing the importance of “primordial European values”
      4) Postmodernism, celebrating cultural pluralism as the new alter-
         native after the breakdown of modernity’s totalizing structures
      5) Scientism, focusing on life sciences, genetics, eugenics, and
         their ideological implications
      6) Geopolitics, such as the ideas of Eurasianism promulgated by
         Alexandr Dugin16

It is easy to gather from the diversity of the above ideological elements that the
New Right is not a totalizing ideology that gives absolute ideological answers
to all aspects of life, but a loosely structured ideological current that conveys
a polyvalence of ideas, giving rise to a Weltanschauung with diverse and even
divergent opinions. As such the European New Right should be considered
a cultural and intellectual network presenting itself as working towards the
preservation and rekindling of European culture, tradition and identity. It uti-
lizes a metapolitical strategy aimed at inspiring a revolutionary change in the
current cultural hegemony of the global ­liberal-democratic system, and works
towards the establishment of new tribal communities. Over the last cen-
tury, both the European New Right and the Traditionalists have succeeded in
impacting intellectuals and scholars, as well as the political and cultural main-
stream, securing their place within the field of radical politics and religion.
    The final ideological constellation worth mentioning in this context is
Eurasianism. Its contemporary variant, at times also referred to as neo-­
Eurasianism, can be considered a politicized variety of Traditionalism.
Eurasianism has its origins in early twentieth-century Russian émigré
­circles and draws on classical theories of geopolitics, such as that of Halford
 Mackinder, who later became the first director of the London School of
 Economics. Eurasianism is a geopolitical theory which interprets the politi-
 cal situation through geographical factors rather than through cultural ones,
 and posits a Euro-Asian “heartland”, with a continental axis centred in Greater
 Russia, in opposition to an Atlantic, US-dominated bloc.17 Its most promi-
 nent contemporary spokesperson, Alexandr Dugin, began his political career


 16. O’Meara, New Culture, New Right, 27.
 17. Sedgwick, Against the Modern World, 226.


248
                                                radical politics and political esotericism