sector as an example, Christianity was in many respects much more of a dom-
inant religious tradition in Western societies as late as a few ­decades ago than
it is today. In the 1980s when Stark and Bainbridge developed their theory of
religion it still made sense to keep the typologies of “sect” and “cult” based
on tension with traditional mainstream religion, and explain phenomena out-
side it in terms of schisms, import or innovation. Today, however, innovative
and imported characteristics have intermingled and mixed with elements that
earlier were considered traditional, creating new and changing traditions.
Still, none of these are as dominant as the Christian culture used to be. With
increased individualism, old boundaries have broken down and are today
continually and habitually crossed over, creating and recreating new cultural
phenomena. In this context, the notion of a tension with the socio-cultural
environment becomes much more problematic. Which socio-cultural envi-
ronment are we measuring against in a society increasingly marked by plural-
ism? At Hälsogränden, mainstream and complementary therapies exist side by
side, and, as for the hairdressing company, as different possibilities within the
same activity, as well as intermingled with mainstream institutions. For the
individual who receives dietary advice, haircuts, yoga and Rosen therapy, any
kind of borders would probably be experienced as constructed and artificial.


CONCLUSIONS

Historical perspectives on Western esotericism have been useful and fruit-
ful for the study of contemporary religiosity. There are historical connections
and relations between different phenomena which ought to be acknowledged.
However, I would call for a further discussion about different kinds of criteria
which could be used in this context, and welcome a more inclusive dialogue
with other approaches in religious studies. Thus, the possibility of combin-
ing research on “esotericism” (itself a scholarly construct that has been used
and developed in several different and conflicting ways) with other theoreti-
cal perspectives about new religious movements and contemporary expres-
sions of religion has been the main agenda of this chapter. By using relevant
parts of the perspectives of Stark and Bainbridge, and Riis and Woodhead, the
themes of dynamics of religious change, relationships with the mainstream,
and the place of individual inner experience, important in several of the per-
spectives on Western esotericism, could be developed further. This could lead
to insights which would be especially useful and applicable in relation to the
contemporary spiritual scene.
   Structural, cultural and individual factors all influence religious change. As
Hanegraaff noted with regard to the reinterpretations of esotericism in New
Age religion, the market economy, psychologization and Oriental influences
are among the factors that shape the contemporary spiritual ­environment. To
these, I suggest, one might add Western esotericism in a historical and ­cultural

                                                                             389
liselotte frisk



sense, as one current among several others influencing and fuelling the con-
temporary spiritual environment. An important aspect of this is that the gen-
eral effects of migration and globalization may be reconstrued so that they
are not limited to influences from foreign cultures. Writing about Western
esotericism, von Stuckrad has suggested that greater attention should be given
to non-Christian traditions and alternatives within Western culture, and their
importance for the dynamics of religion in Europe. Stark and Bainbridge’s
concepts of innovation and importation may prove useful in developing this
point, and as a tool for understanding religious change both historically and in
contemporary times.
   The role of individual religious experience similarly seems a promising
starting point for further research on the dynamics of religious change. The
individual religious experience, conceptualized as gnosis, is essential in several
of the scholarly conceptions of esotericism, but, as we have seen, its charac-
teristics are not analysed much further. The notion of gnosis in esotericism
research has to be further discussed, problematized and positioned against
other possible kinds of religious experience. For this, further research on reli-
gious emotion in different contexts is needed, also with attention to, for exam-
ple, symbols and artistic expressions. The approach of Riis and Woodhead to
the sociology of religious emotion may start to show the way in this matter.
   I have also argued that a focus on discourses of gnosis and discourses of
“rejected knowledge” has potential for interesting analyses and discussions.
Stark and Bainbridge’s perspective on different kinds of relationship to the
mainstream and different degrees of tension with society may be helpful to
develop the discussion further. From this perspective, both historical and con-
temporary phenomena outside the mainstream could be discussed. The dis-
cussion ought, however, to be conducted against the whole range of religious
groups, including both sects and cults in the sense of Stark and Bainbridge.
As was argued earlier, contemporary spirituality maintains a problematic and
ambivalent relation to the mainstream – as has also been the case for esoteric
currents in the historical sense – which may call for special attention to pro­
cesses specific to contemporary society. The effects of globalization and indi-
vidualization challenge all kinds of traditionally conceived borders. Imported
and innovative features mix with traditional ones, creating new syntheses and
traditions, both organizationally and individually. In an increasingly pluralis-
tic society, it becomes more and more problematic to conceive of a dominant
socio-cultural environment, and therefore also more problematic to discuss,
for example, degrees of tension to “it”. Hälsogränden in Hedemora represents
a new social space where these border transgressions are particularly clear.
Mainstream and “holistic” or complementary therapies are practised on the
same premises, with a focus on the concepts of internal and external health.
The focus on health is also an expression of the contemporary trend towards
individualism combined with the sometimes more or less religious over-
tones of self-sacralization. Also, the border between the secular and sacred is

390
                                           a small - town health centre in sweden



blurred, as it is up to the individual to attribute “secular” or “religious” mean-
ings to the activities they participate in at Hälsogränden. Tentative data from
the study of Dalarna indicate that there is a great span as to how individuals
think about their own engagement, if they conceptualize their engagement in
any specific terms at all.
   Concepts and definitions become what we make them; they do not pos-
sess an essential meaning cut in stone. My suggestion in this chapter has been
that the different approaches that have been proposed to Western esoteri-
cism could be developed further by joining them with perspectives from other
research areas, especially sociologically oriented research on religious change
and the contemporary religious landscape.




                                                                              391
chapter 19

ENTHEOGENIC ESOTERICISM
Wouter J. Hanegraaff




The title of this chapter was not chosen lightly. It brings two highly controver-
sial terms together in a novel combination and, in so doing, attempts to call
attention to a specific phenomenon in contemporary religion, namely the reli-
gious use of psychoactive substances as means of access to spiritual insights
about the true nature of reality. The question of why, and in what sense(s),
this type of religion should be understood as a form of “esotericism” will be
addressed below; but something must be said at the outset about the adjective
“entheogenic” and its implications. The substantive entheogen was coined in
1979 by a group of ethnobotanists and scholars of mythology who were con-
cerned with finding a terminology that would acknowledge the ritual use of
psychoactive plants reported from a variety of traditional religious contexts,
while avoiding the questionable meanings and connotations of current terms,
notably “hallucinogens” and “psychedelics”.1 As suggested by its roots in Greek
etymology (ε’΄νθεος), natural or artificial substances can be called entheogens
(adjective: entheogenic) if they generate, or bring about, unusual states of
consciousness in which those who use them are believed to be “filled”, “pos-
sessed” or “inspired” by some kind of divine entity, presence or force.2 While
the altered states in question are pharmacologically induced, such religious
interpretations of them are obviously products of culture.
   Although the terms “entheogen” and “entheogenic” were invented with
specific reference to the religious use of psychoactive substances, it is impor-
tant to point out – although this broadens current understandings of the term
– that the notion of “entheogenic religion”, if taken literally, does not strictly
imply such substances: after all, there are many other factors that may trigger


   1. Ruck et al., “Entheogens”.
   2. On the rich vocabulary for such states of consciousness in classic antiquity, see the exhaus-
      tive overview in Pfister, “Ekstase”, especially 955–7.


392
                                                                     entheogenic esotericism