in her chapter. First, while contemporary spirituality and particularly “New
Age” has been conceived of as a “part of ” Western esotericism (i.e. as mod-
ern or contemporary esotericism), in the historical sense of the word, esoteri-
cism should rather be seen as one among several other sources of influence
on contemporary spirituality. Second, the focus on gnosis and experience in
attaining “higher knowledge”, common in some of the typological and discur-
sive approaches to esotericism, should be linked to a broader discussion of
“religious experience” and emotion, which is currently attracting new interest
in the study of religion. Third, a focus on deviance, “margin–mainstream” con-
flicts and rejected knowledge, often discussed as a structural feature in esoteric
discourse, should be brought into a broader discussion of tension between
religious groups and mainstream society, and, increasingly in contemporary
society, should be questioned and nuanced. The final conclusion of the chap-
ter is that Western esotericism as a field of research could benefit from, and
contribute to, ongoing discussions in religious studies by combining with
select sociological research from other fields. Frisk calls for a further discus-
sion about different kinds of criteria which could be used in this context, and
welcomes a more inclusive dialogue with other approaches in religious studies.
    In a programmatic article Wouter J. Hanegraaff in Chapter 19 calls for seri-
ous scholarly attention to what he calls “Entheogenic Esotericism”. Noting a
striking neglect of studies on the use of psychoactive substances in religious
movements generally, Hanegraaff argues that an important and analytically
interesting field of religious practice and innovation has been precluded by
generations of scholars due to biases based largely on political circumstances
as well as crypto-Protestant stereotypes of what legitimately counts as “reli-
gion”. In his chapter, Hanegraaff tries to ameliorate the situation by suggesting
the term “entheogenic religion”, which may be subdivided into a stricter and a
wider sense: in the wide sense, religious practices concerned with generating
a state of ε’ νθουσιασμός (“enthusiasm”) are well known and common, utiliz-
ing a number of different techniques, including rhythmic drumming, ritual
prayer and incantations, meditation, or breathing techniques. The ritual use
of substances is only one such technique, and constitutes entheogenic religion
in a stricter sense. Revising his own position on “New Age religion”, and sup-
porting with cases taken from neoshamanism, Hanegraaff argues that there
is much circumstantial evidence to suggest that entheogenic practices in the
strict sense have continued to influence modern and contemporary esoteri-
cism after the “war on drugs” made explicit references to such practices haz-
ardous. The conclusion is that “specialists in the field of contemporary religion
should become aware of their inherited blind spots regarding the role that
entheogens have been playing in these contexts for half a century”, and refine
a hermeneutically suspicious attitude in order to study this much neglected
aspect of the religious field.
    Finally, in “A Deliciously Troubling Duo”, Jay Johnston (Chapter 20) deals
with an issue of acute need of treatment in the study of esotericism: gender.

20
                                                                     introduction



Despite acquiring very little attention from scholars, discourses of gender have
been of a considerable significance for esotericism in general, and surface as
particularly important in relation to much of what is covered by contempo-
rary esotericism as well. As Johnston points out, the “masculinity = culture =
rationality and femininity = nature = intuition” stereotypes have been com-
mon in much of esotericism – but can also be found in the trope, often ­reified
by scholars, of men as “occult scientists” who actively control their world by
the use of magic, and women as “intuitive witches” who are passively and
emotively guided by their surroundings. As such, scholarly accounts here
adhere to stereotypical representations of gender and gender roles. Johnston’s
chapter delves into the deep (and, for many, unknown and seemingly danger-
ous) waters of feminist theory, dealing not only with how the approaches in
question can be used to shed light on gender issues, but also how they may
help in rethinking other aspects of esotericism. In terms of the field in general,
Johnston notes how the common conduct of positioning the esoteric as the
“other” of “the dominant discourse” both feminizes and sexualizes the discur-
sive field of esotericism. In the end, Johnston proposes to “queer the esoteric”,
by applying queer theory’s project of subverting problematic binary categories
and dualistic logic to esotericism itself. The study of esotericism is already – at
least purportedly – engaged in a project similar to queer theory, in terms of
rethinking binaries in cultural and religious history. Johnston further argues
that queering of the discipline might nevertheless be in order, particularly
since “gender identity markers … remain resolutely normative/deviant and
fixed” in most scholarship on contemporary esotericism.
   Together, the chapters in this fourth and final part highlight both processes
of the esoteric leaving cultural and religious margins in the West, and the ben-
efits perspectives from the study of the esoteric could offer religious studies in
general by leaving the margins of academia: Granholm suggests that the devel-
opment of the study of the esoteric, as well as the growing acceptance of and
interest in esotericism by the general public, is an example of “post-­secular”
academic and societal trends; Asprem shows that parapsychology does not
simply represent an “alien incursion” into science, but instead a develop-
ment in “elite” scientific discourse, and that even radical atheist spokesper-
sons such as Sam Harris can harbour interest in phenomena which could be
termed esoteric; the Indigo Child discourse discussed by Kline has breached
the mainstream and connects to broader “sacralizing” discourses of child-
hood; Frisk’s example of the health centre Hälsogränden shows that esoteric
elements peacefully coexist with non-esoteric ones, and are growing in main-
stream acceptance; Hanegraaff discusses how practices neglected by scholars
have probably had an immensely larger impact on contemporary religion than
acknowledged, and how scholarly perspectives need to be modified in order
to address this; and Johnston proposes to interrogate the gender biases of eso-
teric discourse (and its attendant scholarship) to properly “queer the esoteric”
and trouble the binary logic of deviancy connected to it.

                                                                                21
egil asprem and kennet granholm



CONCLUDING REMARKS

While this volume covers much ground, the theme of contemporary esoter-
icism is too broad to be treated in any sort of comprehensive manner in a
single volume. With the main criterion being an interest for theoretical and
methodological innovation and reflection we have tried to include as many
relevant themes as possible, but the reader will undoubtedly notice omissions.
We will briefly discuss some of the most glaring ones.
    First, the reader will notice that the focus is still rather heavily biased in the
direction of intellectualist approaches, while those focused on practice, and
particularly anthropological perspectives, are, with only a couple of excep-
tions, missing. Here, luckily, a lot of material continues to be produced in other
subfields of religious studies (again including “pagan studies”), and within
anthropology. Nevertheless, a firmer integration of anthropological studies of,
and approaches to, contemporary esotericism, should certainly be embraced
by a future work in this field. It should also involve a critical and careful
engagement with the theoretical and conceptual work which has been made
in anthropology, including cognitive anthropology (and the cognitive study of
religion more broadly), which often concern issues that seem to have relevance
for the esoteric. This goes for mainstay notions in anthropological research,
such as “magic” (and its many differentiations), “participation”, “ritual”, etc.
    Second, a reader familiar with the field of Western esotericism in its his-
toriographic form might notice the general lack of discussions of lineages,
currents, historical relations, continuity, and so forth, which are otherwise
common in the field. While authors do deal with historical issues, we have
chosen to go for a more “externalist” approach. That is, instead of meticu-
lously investigating specific, isolated phenomena that may have some claim to
consistency, continuity and autonomy over time, we have instead encouraged
looking at phenomena in their particular and broader cultural and societal
contexts. This is not to preclude altogether the relevance and interest of “inter-
nalist” approaches focusing on specific “traditions” or “currents”. However, it
seemed to us that a work of the present kind ought to be a priority, as internal-
ist approaches to occultist, neopagan, or “spiritual” currents are hardly diffi-
cult to find elsewhere. Furthermore, our conviction is that the approach opted
for will make the work – and in extension the study of Western esotericism
as a field – more relevant for religious studies generally. In this way we also
seek to continue the field’s genuine potential for interdisciplinary research, by
bringing it up to date on contemporary contexts ranging from popular culture
and religion, to science and politics.
    Finally, the reader will notice that the concept of esotericism/esoteric is not
defined conclusively anywhere between the two covers of this book. This is no
accident, but instead a conscious choice. In most recent approaches, “the eso-
teric” is not regarded a coherent “tradition”, nor even a semi-coherent pseudo-
tradition. Instead, most approaches have moved away from rigid and static

22
                                                                            introduction