Aupers also remarks that those who can master computer technology, par-
ticularly the computer programmers, are seen as magicians.77 As one pro-
grammer said, “we put these words together, these little characters together,
and create these magical things”.78 This perception of being a magician due to
creative programming was found in one of the Second Life interviewees. His
avatar name is Thaleenin Sydney, and in the physical world he is a ceremonial
magician and works as a programmer. He claimed that his programming skills
were part of his magical practice, which included creating scripts for ava-
tars in Second Life to use in ritual. His scripts included ones used in ritual at
Covenstead. These scripts, when run on an avatar, make them mimic specific
ritualistic actions. For neopagans these include motions for invoking and ban-
ishing pentagrams, and the fivefold kiss. During our conversation, he stated
that scripting avatars was not always easy: “we have some of the sounds done
and I’m in the middle of scripting them so the timing is right, which is turn-
ing out to be the hardest part”.79 Nevertheless, Sydney saw the incorporation
of Second Life into his magical and astral work as natural. In fact, he claimed
that Second Life was so much like the astral that he used it to help his magical
students with initial astral experiences:

        For someone advanced SL is just another aspect of the astral
        depending on what they want to do. For a beginner SL is best.
        People can get here in 5 min of downloading the program as
        opposed to whatever it may take to get on the astral.80

Throughout the interview Sydney continued to mix his discussion of script-
ing Second Life avatars and working on the astral. It seemed, from his point
of view, there really was little difference, or, as he noted, it was an educational
tool where students learn their magical practices and obtain access to the
astral in both types of embodiment, digital and physical.81 This kind of ambig-
uous embodiment supports the model of Murray and Sixsmith. In each of the
cases where the participant saw Second Life as some form of astral, there was
a mixing of the self, the body, the technology, the imagination, and community
where all of these come together to blend the physical world with the virtual.
Moreover, the ways the participants discussed the cyberastral showed a blend-
ing of geo-temporal and symbolic astral travel. The virtual world is flexible like
the symbolic, but with the ability to interact with others, it also had aspects of
geo-temporal thus creating the cyberastral as its own category of astral travel.
The participants would generally eschew these categories, instead substituting


 77.   Ibid., 230–31.
 78.   Ibid., 231.
 79.   Interview by author, 16 June 2009.
 80.   Ibid.
 81.   Ibid.

                                                                                     179
john l . crow



traditional terminology and adapting it to their circumstances. Nevertheless,
these categories allow the scholar to historicize and contextualize the types
of astral travel experienced. This, in turn, could help to include these kinds of
phenomena into the larger discourse of religious practice and embodiment.


CONCLUSION

This chapter has traced the continuities regarding the astral from ­nineteenth-
century occultism to modern three-dimensional virtual communities embod-
ied in Second Life. Because of the diffusion of occult ideas and their com-
bination with notions of cyberspace and virtual reality, the emergence of a
cyberastral has taken place for some who practise esoteric religion. Extending
notions of the self to include the physical body and the digital, users create
subjective selves which navigate virtual worlds. These virtual embodied selves,
or avatars, can represent the gender, race and culture embodied in the physical
or they can embrace a polymorphic identity taking on the form of the crea-
tures listed in Leadbeater’s The Astral Plane, or assuming alternative genders
and bodily characteristics. Indeed, many avatars have wings, fly, wear clothing
the person is unlikely to don in the physical world, or are have the appearance
of a gender different from the normative gender performed by the participant.
Thus the virtual world is not only a place where the astral manifests, but forms
a larger context for identity exploration.
    Does this mean that everyone who participates in Second Life views it as
the astral plane? No; this is hardly the case, and I located only a small number
of participants who made such a claim. Nevertheless, this should cause schol-
ars to pause and think more about the role of digital technologies when it
comes to the practice of religion as well as pay attention to notions of self
and identity when it comes to religious embodiment, virtual and physical. The
Internet and virtual reality technology are adding a significant dimension to
religious practice and this does not only apply to esoteric religion.
    In 1995 Erik Davis hoped that the astral would be reborn in cyberspace.
With Second Life one might ask if it finally has been. With the way digital
technology and three-dimensional reality is progressing, it might not be long
before more people develop an expansive embodiment, and perhaps, for them
at least, the astral may actually be reborn in cyberspace.




180
chapter 9

THE SECRETS OF SCIENTOLOGY
CONCEALMENT, INFORMATION CONTROL AND
ESOTERIC KNOWLEDGE IN THE WORLD’S MOST
CONTROVERSIAL NEW RELIGION

Hugh B. Urban


      Secrets, secrets SECRETS! Ah, the endless quest, the far, far search,
      the codes, the vias, the symbols, the complications, the compi-
      lations, the mathematicity and abstracticity of secrets, secrets,
      SECRETS!1
      The secret operates as an adorning possession … This involves the
      contradiction that what recedes before the consciousness of oth-
      ers and is hidden from them is emphasized in their consciousness;
      that one should appear as a noteworthy person through what one
      conceals.2
From its origins in the 1950s, the Church of Scientology has been one of the
most controversial, contested, and yet also poorly understood new religions
in the world. Best known for its cast of high-profile celebrity spokespersons,
such as John Travolta, Tom Cruise and Kirstie Alley, the Church has also been
widely attacked by the media, anti-cult groups and various government agen-
cies as a rapacious business and a dangerous “cult of greed”.3 And yet despite
its infamous reputation in popular culture, Scientology has – with a few nota-
ble exceptions4 – rarely been subjected to serious critical analysis by historians
of religions.
    The reasons for this neglect are not far to seek. From its first incorporation
in 1953, the Church of Scientology has been not only one of the most ­lucrative

   1. L. Ron Hubbard, Dianetics 55, 3.
   2. Georg Simmel, “The Secret and the Secret Society”, 377.
   3. See, among many other articles, Behar, “The Thriving Cult of Greed”; Childs & Tobin,
      “Scientology”.
   4. The few scholarly discussions of Scientology in English include Wallis, The Road to
      Total Freedom; Lewis, Scientology; Kent, “Scientology”; Whitehead, Renunciation and
      Reformulation; Christensen, “Inventing L. Ron Hubbard”; Urban, “Fair Game”; Urban, The
      Church of Scientology.

                                                                                       181
hugh b . urban



but also arguably the most secretive (and litigious) new religion in the world,
maintaining very tight control over the flow of information both within and
outside the organization. Not only did the Church develop a complex eso-
teric series of training levels or “advanced technology”, but it has also been
extremely aggressive in enforcing its rights to the information contained in
these higher grades.5 By the late 1960s, moreover, Scientology had also created
elaborate mechanisms of surveillance to monitor both its own members and
its critics in the surrounding society, including its own intelligence agency,
which many have likened to the FBI and the CIA. As Ann Brill and Ashley
Packard observe in their study of Scientology’s war of information on the
Internet, “What makes the Church of Scientology controversial is not so much
Hubbard’s teachings, but the Church’s tenacious secrecy and the extremes to
which it is willing to go to protect itself.”6
   This chapter will critically examine the role of secrecy in the Church of
Scientology, placing it within the historical and sociological context of the
United States during the last six decades. Specifically, it will explore three
periods in the development of Scientology from the late 1940s to the present:

   • the early life and biographical narrative of Scientology’s founder, L. Ron
     Hubbard, particularly his involvement in occultism and ritual magic in
     the late 1940s;
   • the origins of the Church of Scientology in the context of Cold War
     America, where it reflected (and indeed epitomized) the obsession with
     secrecy and information control that characterized this period; and
   • the ongoing wars of information currently being fought in cyberspace, as
     ever more of Scientology’s esoteric knowledge is leaked online, and the
     Church wages massive legal battles over copyrights and trade secrets in
     the digital realm.