as a dissident opposing the Soviet system. He was, however, slowly alienated
by the West during visits in the 1980s where he spoke at several New Right
meetings in Belgium, France and Spain. He became convinced that the Soviet
political model was a preferable alternative to Western democracies, right as
the Soviet Union was about to fall. In 1993 he and Eduard Limonov founded
the National Bolshevik Party, which utilized a strange mix of totalitarian sym-
bolism and slogans from Stalinism and Nazism in its propaganda. Dugin left
the party in 1998 after limited electoral success, moving towards the political
mainstream. He became friends with Gennady Zyuganov, the leader of the
CPRF (Communist Party of the Russian Federation), which was at that time
still the leading party in the Duma.18
    In 2001, Dugin founded the Eurasian Movement, which quickly became suc-
cessful with several thousand members in Russia, and received economic sup-
port from several former KGB officers with ties to the Kremlin and Vladimir
Putin.19 Dugin’s writings became increasingly prominent, and with his book
Geopolitical Foundations: The Geopolitical Future of Russia (1997),20 which
was studied by both civilian and military analysts (and even used as a textbook
in parts of the military), he became a highly recognized political theorist in
Russia. The book argued for a Berlin–Moscow–Tokyo axis in opposition to an
American–Atlantic one.21 In 2008, his influence reached an even higher peak
when he was appointed director and professor of a “Centre for Conservatism
Studies” under the auspices of the Sociology Department at Moscow State
University. There he teaches a curriculum of geopolitical Eurasianism, as well
as Western philosophy, mysticism and Traditionalism. The purpose of the
centre is to “stimulate research and the development of conservative theory”
and to “overcome the negative factors that threaten Russian human sciences”,
such as “the imbalance towards Positivism in the Russian humanities” and the
“lack of institutions that provide research on conservative social philosophy”
in order to “develop and establish conservative ideology in Russia based on
scientific research”.22 In addition to the centre in Moscow, six other branches
are planned in major Russian cities, including St Petersburg and Novgorod.
Dugin calls his own position “radical centrism”, in the sense that he endorses
a ­centralizing “father figure” like Putin while still maintaining radical (geo-)
political stances with his opposition to liberal-capitalist American world
hegemony. He is a good example of esoteric transfers within the political right,
something which will be explained in further detail in the next section, where
we will also expand on the overall relationship between the radical right and
esotericism.


 18.   Ibid., 229.
 19.   Mankoff, Russian Foreign Policy, 66–7.
 20.   Dugin, Osnovy Geopolitiki.
 21.   Sedgwick, Against the Modern World, 229–37.
 22.   Konservatizm.org, “About Center of Conservatism Studies”.


                                                                                      249
jacob christiansen senholt



ESOTERICISM AND THE RADICAL RIGHT

Before going into concrete examples of contemporary esoteric transfers, let
us briefly reflect on how the relationship between esotericism and the right
has remained a prominent underlying theme in both politics and popular cul-
ture. In politics, and in other places of power in society, esotericism has made
a distinct mark. Frances Yates demonstrated an extensive esoteric impulse
in Renaissance humanism, and in the intellectual culture of the Elizabethan
era.23 The spread of Freemasonry in higher tiers of society during the early
modern period similarly established a foundation for the later emergence of
esoteric freemasonry and initiatic orders. Two of the Founding Fathers of the
United States, George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, were Freemasons,
as were most kings of the Danish royal family since Frederick V (1723–66).
There are many contemporary examples as well, such as former French presi-
dent François Mitterrand, who openly showed interest in Freemasonry and
esotericism, organizing the construction of the Louvre Pyramid, which later
became important in Dan Brown’s popular The Da Vinci Code. When it
comes to the right more specifically and its relationship with esotericism, it is
worth mentioning Umberto Eco and Theodor Adorno, who see esotericism as
inherently connected to fascism and right-wing politics. Both see fascism as
something esoteric, hidden and ever-present.24 Eco even introduces the term
“Ur-Fascism”, describing it as a cult of tradition, which rejects modernism, and
thus reverts to irrationalism and “action for action’s sake”. In The New York
Review of Books Eco wrote:

      Ur-Fascism is still around us, sometimes in plainclothes. It would
      be so much easier, for us, if there appeared on the world scene
      somebody saying, “I want to reopen Auschwitz, I want the Black
      Shirts to parade again in the Italian squares.” Life is not that simple.
      Ur-Fascism can come back under the most innocent of disguises.
      Our duty is to uncover it and to point our finger at any of its new
      instances – every day, in every part of the world.25

If not ever-present, there is at least evidence for a continuous line of eso-
teric right-wing thought after World War II, as documented by both Nicholas

 23. E.g. Frances Yates, Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition; Frances Yates, The Occult
     Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age.
 24. See Adorno, “Theses against Occultism”, 172. Although both Eco and Adorno attack what
     they call “esotericism” and “the occult” respectively, it is worth noting that esotericism is
     here understood in a broad sense as irrationalism and the consummation of such irration-
     ality in culture. An excellent academic examination of the phenomenon of “occulture” can
     be found in Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West. Cf. Chapter 6 of this volume for a
     presentation of the concept of “occulture”.
 25. Eco, “Ur-Fascism”, 12


250
                                                radical politics and political esotericism



Goodrick-Clarke and Joscelyn Godwin. It is worth mentioning the post-war
activities of Savitri Devi, a woman of European origin who embraced both
Hinduism and National Socialism, and Chilean diplomat and author Miguel
Serrano, who provided the foundational texts for “esoteric Hitlerism” as it
developed after the war.26 The key idea for both is that Hitler is seen as guided
by esoteric forces, and that he was not a mere human but instead an “ava-
tar”, an incarnation of a God. According to Devi and Serrano, Hitler was none
other than Kalki, the last avatar of Vishnu, heralding the end of the current age
of darkness, the Kali Yuga, which, following a period of cataclysmic destruc-
tion, will be followed by the golden age of Satya Yuga. Hitler’s implementation
of the Nuremberg race laws was, according to Savitri Devi, a first step towards
a reimplementation of the Hindu caste ­system on a ­worldwide scale.27 It was,
however, not the esoteric Hitlerists who popularized the theme of esotericism
and the right. Instead the influence came from Louis Pauwels and Jacques
Bergier’s Le Matin des Magiciens (1960), translated into English as Morning
of the Magicians.28 The book provides a fantastic account in which fiction is
intermingled with fact, creating an esoteric mix similar to the later bestsell-
ing novels of Dan Brown. The book quickly became a success, was translated
into numerous languages, and is still in print today. The success of the book
led to the formation of a monthly magazine, Planète (in 1961), which within
a few months reached a circulation of a hundred thousand copies, and was
also translated into numerous other languages. Although the magazine faded
in the 1970s, it had already made its mark, popularizing both esotericism in
general as well as more marginal currents such as Traditionalism and Nazi
occultism.29 The book describes Hitler as having been possessed by a diaboli-
cal entity, and borrowed heavily from the writings of Hermann Rauschning,
a former Nazi who, after emigrating from Germany in 1936, wrote several
books denouncing the Nazi regime.30 The popularization of negative occult
characterizations of Hitler led to an increased interest in “Nazi mysteries”
with numerous fictional and non-fictional books exploring this subject. The
most well-known example is Trevor Ravenscroft’s The Spear of Destiny (1972).
Ravenscroft was a British soldier during World War II, and was interred as
a prisoner of war in Germany between 1941 and 1945. He claims to have
met a Viennese Jew, Walter Johannes Stein, who provided him with intimate

 26. Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun; Godwin, Arktos.
 27. Devi, The Lightning and the Sun, 229–49; Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 95–7. For a more
     general account of Savitri Devi and Miguel Serrano, see Goodrick-Clarke, Hitler’s Priestess;
     Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 173–92.
 28. Pauwels has ties to the New Right, specifically to GRECE and Alain de Benoist, whom he
     offered the job as editor of Le Figaro Magazine in the late 1970s.
 29. Sedgwick, Against the Modern World, 208.
 30. Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 108–11. One of Rauschning’s books was Hitler Speaks, which
     was claimed to consist of transcripts of the author’s personal conversations with Hitler and
     portrayed him as an unstable, fanatical, and diabolical character.


                                                                                            251
jacob christiansen senholt