Though Anton LaVey may be sceptical of esotericism as a “religious” belief,
and frequently mocks esoteric systems as old-fashioned rubbish, he neverthe-
less makes much use of its tropes. But for what purpose, exactly? LaVey seems
to say: we are now going to enact a psychodrama, to achieve specific goals, not
only in the ritual chamber. I shall assume the role of high priest. In order for
this exercise to work properly, we will build up the appropriate atmosphere
with much reference to tradition and esoteric tropes.
   The most common reason for inventing a religious tradition and creating
an emic historiography is, as Hammer and Lewis put it, that this “confers legit-
imacy to religious claims and practices”.95 On a more detailed level, tradition
typically strengthens group cohesion by letting adherents identify with a com-
mon history, gives plausibility to doctrines and practices, and provides lead-
ers with opportunity to give legitimacy to new ideas they may come up with
along the way by ascribing them to ancient figures.96 At least the first two are
clearly observable in the Church of Satan. But more important, I contend, are
the openly displayed and consciously utilized mechanics of tradition as mood-
creating spectacle for purely instrumental purposes.
   Hence, Anton LaVey should not be considered a counterfeiter of tradition,
but a person quite openly playing with the psychological effects of tradition,
and inviting others to take part in this game. LaVey cynically suggests always
asking the question “Who gains?”.97 In the case of belief, half-playful or tem-
porary, in a Satanic tradition with deep roots, who gains? The answer is prob-
ably not – as some might suggest – only Anton LaVey and his church’s bank
account, but the individual member as well, who gains psychological ben-
efits both in and outside of the ritual chamber. My impression is that most
members of the Church of Satan will assume the position Hammer and Lewis
describe among reiki and reflexology healers, reproducing semi-mythical his-
torical narratives, but in the end insisting that historical background is irrel-
evant as long as the system works.98 Satanism and its rituals, it seems, “work”
for many adherents, thus leaving them quite happy to have a tradition that is
fictitious to some extent.




 95.   Hammer & Lewis, “Introduction”, 4.
 96.   Ibid., 6.
 97.   Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 229.
 98.   Hammer & Lewis, “Introduction”, 15. My statement concerning the view of tradition
       among “most” Church of Satan members is quite impressionistic, and is based on very lim-
       ited fieldwork in combination with regular reading of various Internet forums for Satanists
       during the last decade. Admittedly, the analysis is hence very preliminary, and needs more
       substantiation.


90
chapter 5

PERENNIALISM AND ICONOCLASM
CHAOS MAGICK AND THE LEGITIMACY OF INNOVATION

Colin Duggan




Chaos Magick1 is an innovation of twentieth-century occultism that draws
influence from a variety of sources, including occultists such as Aleister
Crowley and Austin Osman Spare. It began in the late 1970s with the pub-
lication of Peter Carroll’s Liber Null and Ray Sherwin’s The Book of Results in
1978. These seminal texts would form the theoretical and practical underpin-
nings for a second wave of authors in the mid-1980s. Some of these later texts
provided a critical evaluation of the development of Chaos Magick and firmly
established it within the discourse on twentieth-century occultism. There have
been very few scholarly commentaries on Chaos Magick, and most of those
that have been produced lack the methodological and theoretical components
required to build common terminology and further understanding. Of the
scholars who have commented on Chaos Magick, Dave Evans has proved to
be the most thorough with the historical analysis he offers in The History of
British Magick After Crowley, despite his claim that an accurate overall his-
tory of Chaos Magick “may not yet be possible”.2 Richard Sutcliffe’s article
“Left-Hand Path Ritual Magick: An Historical and Philosophical Overview”
gives a description of Chaos Magick as one of the currents of Left-Hand
Path Magick, but does not focus on it specifically.3 This shortfall of scholarly


   1. Chaos Magick is capitalized and spelled with a “k” in this chapter as this is how it most
      often appears in the primary sources. The addition of the “k” is due to the influence of the
      British occultist Aleister Crowley, who introduced this convention. See Crowley, “Magick
      in Theory and Practice”, 123–35.
   2. Evans, History of British Magick, 351. See also Versluis, Magic and Mysticism, 139–42;
      Barrett, “Chaos Magick”, 105–6; Houston, “Chaos Magic”, 55–9; Urban, Magia Sexualis,
      222–54.
   3. For discussion of Left-Hand Path Magic, see Evans, History of British Magick, 177–228;
      Granholm, “‘The Prince of Darkness on the Move’”; Granholm, “Dragon Rouge”; Granholm,
      “The Left-Hand Path and Post-Satanism”.


                                                                                              91
colin duggan



a­ ttention, ­particularly from within the field of Western esotericism, prompted
 the research on which this chapter is based.
     This chapter will take Chaos Magick as its example and investigate how
 tradition and perennialism are used to legitimize innovation among its practi-
 tioners. There will be a brief discussion of contemporary occultism and magic,
 as they are understood here, as well as an outline of the relevant Chaos Magick
 texts and authors. The appeal to tradition is a common strategy used by a
 broad range of groups and individuals to seek legitimacy for the claims they
 make. This strategy has been examined closely by Olav Hammer4 and will be
 discussed in relation to Chaos Magick before finally embarking on the discus-
 sion of the legitimizing of innovation through ambivalent appeal to tradition.


CONTEMPORARY OCCULTISM

In order to discuss Chaos Magick and its subsequent reinterpretations in
terms of contemporary occultism, a clarification of the term “occultism”
itself, as it is deployed in the field of Western esotericism, is required. Wouter
Hanegraaff ’s analysis describes occultism as:

       [a] category in the study of religions, which comprises all attempts
       by esotericists to come to terms with a disenchanted world or, alter-
       natively, by people in general to make sense of esotericism from the
       perspective of a disenchanted secular world.5

This definition serves to delineate post-Enlightenment esotericism and high-
light the subsequent reinterpretation of esoteric ideas. The definition has,
however, been problematized by Marco Pasi, who outlines the different uses
of the term and suggests more specific characterizations than Hanegraaff.6
Pasi also takes into account the differences between many of the groups that
constitute occultism for Hanegraaff.7 Agreeing with Hanegraaff, he notes that
“[o]ccultism presents … clear signs of the impact that secularization was

   4. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 85–200.
   5. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 422. Christopher Partridge has argued
      against Hanegraaff ’s usage of the term secularization and suggests that “[i]f a society as a
      whole is undergoing a process which does not involve anything like ‘a disappearance or
      marginalization of religion’, it has to be described in terms other than ‘secularization’. If it
      is not, one is led into a thicket of terminological and theological problems”. Partridge, The
      Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 40.
   6. Pasi, “Occultism”.
   7. A good example of this occurs when considering the fact that those engaged in spiritual-
      ism are communicating with the souls of the dead and trying to present their practice as
      scientific while those who proclaim themselves to be occultists (an emic distinction) are
      communicating with non-human discarnate entities and claim to be heirs to a long line of
      initiatic wisdom (ibid., 1367).

92
                                                              perennialism and iconoclasm



­ aving … on the most heterodox fringes of European culture and represents
h
an important development in the history of Western Esotericism.”8 However,
he insists that “the spiritual realisation of the individual” and the role of the tra-
ditional “occult sciences” are vital to any thorough understanding of the term.9
Both the general definition and the specific characterization given above place
occultism in a post-Enlightenment context. However, the former refers to all
post-Enlightenment esotericism whereas the latter describes a specific current
within Western esotericism. Pasi’s characterization is relevant when consider-
ing late twentieth-century developments where the focus shifts from the insti-
tutional occultism of groups like the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn to
the radical subjectivity of developments like Chaos Magick. The individual-
ist aspect has its roots in the occultism of the late nineteenth century and is
paramount to understanding late twentieth-century occultism. Ray Sherwin’s
The Book of Results states the importance of individualism in Chaos Magick as
follows: “Since magick is an individualist pursuit the individual must always
be of paramount importance and anyone who denies this is looking for profit
or power or does not know any better.”10 In this chapter, occultism will be
referred to as either early or late twentieth-century occultism, both of which
are concerned with magical practice and “the spiritual realisation of the indi-
vidual”. Late twentieth-century occultism takes into account factors such as
increasing access to a large amount of information and the increasing democ-
ratization of text production.
    It is also necessary at this stage briefly to review usage of the term “magic”,
particularly as it has many diverse definitions and remains problematic. The
early history of the term is encapsulated by Marco Pasi in the entry “Magic” in
The Brill Dictionary of Religion where he states: