Considering that most discussions on secularization and the post-­secular
relate to “religion” in fairly narrow and “old-school” ways, focusing on main-
line religious institutions, “beliefs” and “convictions”, and community-estab-
lishing functions, one may wonder if there is any relevance for something as
apparently unorthodox as the esoteric. However one defines the esoteric, it
can be conclusively determined that it does not fit into the conception of reli-
gion common to scholars such as Bruce and Habermas. A response could be
to withdraw completely from these debates; but I believe that meaningful dis-
cussion is possible. However, in order to do so it is of considerable impor-
tance to delineate the esoteric and reassess previous theoretical descriptions
and definitions. Obviously, common sociological interpretations of the eso-
teric and occult as dealing with secrecy and “deviant” knowledge claims are
unusable if one is to discuss the subject in the public sphere. In most current
scholarly accounts the esoteric is regarded not as a “tradition” consisting of
distinct doctrines and practices and situated in clearly outlined institutions,
but as specific approaches to knowledge that cross the borders of religious and
secular identities.69
    In short, esoteric approaches to knowledge may be religious, but are not
necessarily so. This applies both to Hanegraaff ’s discussion of “gnosis” as a
“third stream” in European cultural history, distinct from (but connected to)
the streams of reason and faith,70 and to von Stuckrad’s description of the
esoteric as relating to claims to higher knowledge and ways of accessing it.71
Consequently, it might be possible to make a division into religious and non-
religious esotericisms, and to conclude that secularization and the post-­secular
might then have a clear impact on the former but not the latter. Introducing
such a divide would, however, compromise one of the most promising possi-
bilities offered by the study of the esoteric: the examination of “that which lies
in between”, which problematizes the distinction of the secular and the reli-
gious in the first place. As clearly demonstrated by the examples of such figures
as Paracelsus (1493–1541) and Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), and phenom-
ena such as alchemy and astrology, reason and faith were in no way mutu-
ally exclusive in pre-Enlightenment times. Furthermore, as demonstrated by
Kocku von Stuckrad in his contribution to this volume, contemporary science
is not devoid of “trans-scientific” elements. This would, in turn, seem to suggest
that the modern distinction between science (reason) and religion (faith) is, at
least to some degree, an artificial construct. None of this, of course, implies
that secularist and post-secularist discourses have no bearing on the esoteric.

 69. See Chapter 2 of the present volume.
 70. Hanegraaff, “Reason, Faith, and Gnosis”.
 71. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”.


                                                                                   321
kennet granholm



    For a more detailed discussion of the esoteric in the secular I refer to von
Stuckrad’s chapter in the present volume. However, a more general discussion
is in order here. Secularism and secularization have certainly affected esoteri-
cism, and the accounts in this regard provided by Hanegraaff and Hammer are
spot on. Hanegraaff notes four principal changes in post-Enlightenment eso-
tericism: an adaptation to the ideals of reason and rationality; the broadening
of the scope of influence and source material to increasingly and more expli­
citly include non-Western cultures and non-Christian religions; the adoption
of an evolutionary paradigm to spiritual development; and the introduction
of psychologized interpretations of esoteric phenomena and teachings.72
Hammer focuses on the appeal to science as one of three major legitimizing
strategies in post-Enlightenment esotericism.73 All these developments can be
directly attributed to secularism and the effects of it on European societies in
the form of secularization. Secularist discourses posited religion as something
antiquated and belonging to more primitive stages of cultural development,
and the effects were mostly directed towards the dominant religious institu-
tions of society (i.e. various Christian Churches). Consequently, esoteric actors
attempted to frame their teachings and vocabulary to more closely fit into the
“new scientific worldview”. A further effect of the relative “de-­Christening” of
Europe was that it became both possible and appealing to turn to non-Chris-
tian, “more authentic”, religions for inspiration.74
    However, even though Hanegraaff ’s description of post-Enlightenment
esotericism as “all attempts by esotericists to come to terms with a disen-
chanted world”75 is sound, his calling it secularized esotericism is not.76 As dis-
cussed earlier, theories of secularization deal with changes in society and its
institutions, which in turn may have indirect repercussions for religious doc-
trines, practices and “beliefs”. It is not religion itself which is becoming secu-
larized, but religious institutions, and the same could be said to apply to the
esoteric. Hanegraaff ’s assertions that “the term ‘secularisation’ does not stand
for a theory but for a historical fact” and entails “a profound transformation of
religion” rather than a disappearance or a marginalization of it77 is even more
problematic.
    So what about the post-secular? Some years ago I made a preliminary
attempt to examine what “post-secular esotericism” could possibly be. While
this attempt certainly had its flaws, the basic premise of the approach still


 72. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 411–513; Hanegraaff, “How Magic
     Survived the Disenchantment of the World”.
 73. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 201–330.
 74. For further discussion on these subjects see Granholm, “Locating the West”.
 75. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 422.
 76. For a critique of Hanegraaff ’s use of the term “secularization” see Partridge, The
     Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 40.
 77. Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of the World”, 358.


322
                the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



holds. Building on Hanegraaff ’s comments on disenchantment involving a
social pressure to discard spontaneous participation – understood as a ten-
dency towards emotive, analogical, non-reasoning thought and action – in
favour of instrumental causality,78 I conceived of “post-secular esotericism …
as an active effort to acknowledge, embrace and seek affective and analogical
thinking”.79 I also connected these changes to late modern societal transfor-
mations such as globalization, transnational networking, detraditionalization,
and an overall intensification of developments set in motion in earlier phases
of modernization. What could be added to this is the impact of modern com-
munication media. As religion, just as the esoteric, is always mediated, it
becomes relevant to look at how the media in question shapes it. The need is
made further acute when looking at media as “sites where construction, nego-
tiation, and reconstruction of cultural meaning takes place”.80 Written forms
of communication work on a different set of parameters than oral ones, and
both differ from the mass mediated forms of communication which domi-
nate today. Examining the esoteric in contemporary times necessitates look-
ing at the role played by modern electronic and digital communication media
and popular culture. The term mediatization is useful here. It relates to “the
process through which core elements of a social or cultural activity … assume
media form”, implying that

      the activity is, to a greater or lesser degree, performed through
      interaction with a medium, and the symbolic content and the
      structure of the social and cultural activity are influenced by media
      environments and media logic, upon which they gradually become
      more dependent.81

While it is implicit in most discussions of mediatization, what is meant by
“the media” are modern forms of mass communication and interactive media.
Some effects of mediatization on the esoteric are when occult orders have their
primary means of communication via the Internet, even to the extent where
initiations need to be performed through this medium, and when a religion
such as Wicca is informed by a popular television series such as Charmed.
   I have discussed potential post-secular influences on the esoteric, but from
a certain perspective the study of Western esotericism itself, and in particular
the growing acceptance of it as a legitimate field of inquiry, could be regarded
as an expression of post-secular trends. This is the case if the post-secular
implies a broadening of academic sentiments regarding what is worthwhile


 78. Ibid., 377.
 79. Granholm, “Post-Secular Esotericism?”, 63. See also Granholm, “The Sociology of Eso­
     tericism”, 795–6.
 80. Horsfield, “Media”, 113.
 81. Hjarvard, “The Mediatization of Religion”, 13.


                                                                                    323
kennet granholm