tales. Naturally, his evocation of esoteric tradition, in the specific sense of pre-
cisely a tradition being handed down, must be read with this in mind. The
concept of a long and mysterious tradition informing his Satanism, an idea he
does propagate, is – just like Satan, ritual robes, altars, and so on – a colourful
and evocative backdrop to psychodrama of the type he prescribes.
    At least this was probably his intention. However, during my fieldwork
among North American Satanists (most of whom were not members of the
Church of Satan, but often still very much inspired by LaVey), it has become
clear to me that many read him as literally an inheritor of secret esoteric tradi-
tions.28 Thus, when LaVey utilizes stereotypical esoteric markers of legitimacy
and high age, such as references to the Knights Templar as predecessors, many
fail to see the ironic smile and mischievous glint in his eye.29 Irony and playful-
ness are significant traits of LaVey’s texts which are often ignored. When he
brings to the fore the Yezidi as the originators of most Satanism to come, he
does this for the reason that it is evocative and sets the proper mood, regard-
less of if it is a historically “correct” tradition that he sketches. When he mus-
ters stalwart arguments of esoteric legitimacy, he does so because they work
well to create the desired aura of tradition-based validity that help his adher-
ents in their endeavours. Still, if the occasional “rube” was duped and figured
the “traditional” elements a good reason to pay the membership fee in the
Church of Satan, LaVey would probably not have minded.
    LaVey was conjecturally not very serious about his claims that Satanism has
deep historical esoteric roots, but intended them to be perceived by the sharp-
eyed Satanist as fairy-tale fluff creating the appropriate atmosphere, rather
than literal truth. Judging from what I have observed in my fieldwork, his
readers are frequently not as sharp-eyed and perceptive as he had hoped, and
they either misunderstand the ontological status of LaVey’s claims because of
lacking reading comprehension, or they project their own hopes concerning
tradition into his texts. To a great extent, it would seem LaVey has suffered
a fate similar to that of another great humorist and ironic, Aleister Crowley,
who is also often read too literally. The English magician wrote of having cel-
ebrated child sacrifices 150 times a year between 1912 and 1928.30 Of course,
what he meant was that he had masturbated frequently in sex magical rites,
thus spilling seed containing potential children. A great many people, though
in this case hardly any among his actual followers, did not comprehend this
obvious joke and thought Crowley a child murderer.
    Though they may ultimately have a very different raison d’être in the Satanic
context, there are several concepts in LaVey’s texts that echo those well known


 28. My fieldwork was conducted in New York City in two three-week periods in the summer of
     2010 and spring of 2011. Additional fieldwork has been carried out continuously in Sweden
     2007–11.
 29. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 54–5.
 30. Crowley, Magick in Theory and Practice, 95.


78
                                                secret lineages and de facto satanists



from esotericism. For example, LaVey’s dividing of history into different
eras and ages, where the latter bear the mark of either Fire or Ice (symboliz-
ing different religious/moral ideals), is very similar to concepts familiar from
Theosophy and Thelema.31 LaVey, who was reasonably familiar with esoteric
source material, developed his own creed in dialogue with it, discarding most
of its intricate metaphysics with a happy grin, but always keeping that which
was useful for his goals. Some esoteric notions and trappings are, simply put,
nice-looking frosting on an otherwise perhaps somewhat bland-looking ideo-
logical cake. Such use of it is entirely in accordance with a characteristically
LaVeyan statement in The Satanic Bible: “Man needs ceremony and ritual, fan-
tasy and enchantment.”32
   By fiercely attacking the esotericists of old, and then still making ample use
of their material, for example John Dee’s Enochian language (almost half of
The Satanic Bible consists of a reworking of Dee’s material),33 LaVey can both
have his cake and throw it in the garbage can. The esoteric tradition is fraudu-
lent, an old worm-stung idol that needs to be smashed. But if one has the right
understanding of it, LaVey seems to say, much that is useful can be salvaged
and incorporated into a new and entirely rational tradition – that still has con-
tinuity with the past. LaVey, in short, is not blind to how attractive high age is
to many when it comes to ideas, but pairs the appeal of tradition with rational,
materialistic interpretations more in unison with his time.


ESOTERIC GENEALOGIES

Constructing historical lineages was once very important among most eso-
tericists. Theosophist Henry Olcott, for instance, held up his society as the
inheritors of a tradition encompassing Albertus Magnus, Cagliostro, Pico
della Mirandola, Paracelsus, Cornelius Agrippa, alchemists, Rosicrucians,
and many others. In more recent times, there has been a decreasing tendency
to explicitly view older generations of esoteric writers as spiritual forebears.
The more or less tangible initiatory chain Antoine Faivre has written of is no
longer quite as essential to all practitioners.34
   LaVey is not, as perhaps would have been expected, disinterested in eso-
teric genealogies. In fact, he spends quite a few pages on delineating them. For
instance, he details how rites of the Illuminati influenced Ordo Templi Orientis


 31. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 219–20. LaVey’s description of epochs seems to be derived
     from Hans Hörbiger’s World Ice Theory.
 32. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 53.
 33. For Satanic uses of Enochian, see Asprem, Arguing with Angels, chapter 6.
 34. Faivre, Access to Western Esotericism, 14–15; Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 86–7. It is
     worth noting that the Theosophical Society later moved away from the heavy emphasis on
     being inheritors of the Western esoteric tradition.


                                                                                        79
per faxneld



and the Order of the Golden Dawn. The ideas of the Illuminati are described
as being in fairly good accordance with his own.35 Ordo Templi Orientis,
LaVey states in The Satanic Bible, were “practicing some of the principles set
forth in this volume”.36 Various inter-war German groups are also said to be
derived from the Illuminati to some extent. Practices within these groups,
LaVey claims, form the basis for his ritual “Die Elektrischen Vorspiele”.37 The
main symbol of the Church of Satan, the Sigil of Baphomet, was according
to LaVey “used by the Knights Templar to represent Satan”.38 The symbol has
survived through the ages, and has been known by many names, he explains.
In one of his more bombastic essays, first published in 1970, LaVey writes of
forebears who were “tortured as agents of Satan”, and pours scorn on those
dabblers in the occult today who refuse to accept the label of Satanist, the label
which “killed their brothers and sisters of the past”.39 Their refusal to do so
besmirches “the names of those who bore the mark of brand and tongs and
gazed upon their dead and dying with curses softly spoken”. Toward the end
of the essay the Templars are mentioned, giving them the position of Satanic
pioneers.40 Making this group part of one’s own genealogy is of course among
the most common devices of esoteric legitimation.
   Occasionally LaVey also makes claims to possess esoteric knowledge, in
the sense of something truly secret, passed down between initiates only. For
example, he states concerning a supposedly Russian ritual: “Oral communi-
cation and fraternal legacy have made the following rite available.”41 Using a
familiar line of argument, he also makes himself out to be the custodian of a
higher wisdom than that of older esotericists, incorporating their systems but
surpassing them. For example, “L’Air epais”, a putatively Templar-constructed
rite that LaVey presents, is according to him an expression of an insight
supreme to that disseminated in Freemasonry, and could be called a thirty-
fourth degree, above the thirty-three in Masonic systems.42 His Satanic sys-
tem thus supplants the limited understanding of esotericists that came before.
Clearly, tradition is not unimportant to this writer, even if he may often be
cheerfully disrespectful towards it.


 35. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 78.
 36. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 103.
 37. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 106. It is obvious that the ritual did not originate in inter-war
     Germany, but was written much later, since it contains references to Lovecraft’s mythos
     (for example on pp. 120–21). LaVey’s bringing together of these groups under the heading
     Schwarze Orden is further undoubtedly somewhat arbitrary.
 38. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 136.
 39. LaVey, The Devil’s Notebook, 33. Originally published in Cloven Hoof, March 1970. Also
     reprinted in a 1986 issue of the same newsletter.
 40. Ibid., 34.
 41. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 136.
 42. Ibid., 55.



80
                                                  secret lineages and de facto satanists