The ancient Greek term mageía, which is at the origin of all mod-
         ern words related to “magic”, had a Persian origin, and served to
         indicate, since its adoption by Greek culture, religious activities
         considered to be exotic, unsanctioned, or forbidden. The term kept
         these mostly negative connotations in Roman culture, where it was
         translated as magia.11

Pasi also notes the role played by late nineteenth-century scholars, work-
ing in the social sciences, in universalizing the category of “magic” and the
strong tendency to cast magic as a primitive form of religion.12 The nega-
tive and positive connotations of the term “magic” are a central issue in the

   8.   Ibid., 1366.
   9.   Ibid.
 10.    Sherwin, The Book of Results, 7.
 11.    Pasi, “Magic”, 1134.
 12.    Ibid., 1134–5. For a review of the history of “magic” see also Lehrich, The Language of
        Demons and Angels, 2–11.

                                                                                            93
colin duggan



history of how the term has been deployed. In his article “Sympathy or the
Devil”, Hanegraaff analyses the way theories of magic were presented in the
Renaissance.13 These were typically based on the inherent harmony in the cos-
mos as created by a loving God. However, there were also contemporaneous
accusations that any effects observed in magic were actually being carried out
by some kind of intermediary demon associated with the Christian devil. In
post-­Enlightenment occultism, there is a shift to a psychologized conception
of magic. An outstanding example of this shift is the early twentieth-century
British occultist Austin Osman Spare who claimed a wholly psychologized
system of magic. Aleister Crowley also played a major role in this shift, but
displayed ambivalence on the issue of magical efficacy on more than one occa-
sion. Although Chaos Magick is in many senses an extension of this psycho-
logical model, given its emphasis on subjectivity,14 Chaos Magicians are also
quick to claim the influence of chaos theory and the modern proliferation
of information on their conception of magic. In the psychologized vein, Ray
Sherwin, in The Theatre of Magick claims that

     [m]agick has always been a study of the mind and how to make use
     of its latent powers. Some of these powers are still considered by
     most people to be supernormal. It also sought to use the powers
     the people saw in nature.15

The key idea here is the belief that humans can develop and improve them-
selves through the use of some system of magical practices. The importance
of the individual aspect of Chaos Magick is commented on by Versluis in his
Magic and Mysticism:

     One is struck by the individualism that resonates throughout the
     chaos magical movement to such a degree that one can hardly
     speak of a chaos magical tradition even if there is an order of
     “Magical Pact of the Illuminates of Thanateros”.16

The strategies employed in the texts of Chaos Magick demonstrate that there
is no self-contained “chaos magical tradition” but that Chaos Magick is an
innovation of twentieth-century occultism. It makes a set of claims about a
constructed tradition of magic which are then modified by individuals to suit


13. Hanegraaff, “Sympathy or the Devil”.
14. The Crowleyan idea of magic as a lifelong commitment to better the self is certainly a part
    of Chaos Magick and is just one of the indicators of Crowley’s influence.
15. Sherwin, The Theatre of Magick, 7.
16. Versluis, Magic and Mysticism, 142. Founded by Peter Carroll, the Illuminates of Thanateros
    (IOT) is the most prominent Chaos Magick organization. The word “Thanateros” comes
    from the Greek terms for death and love combined.


94
                                                              perennialism and iconoclasm



their own purposes. These purposes are often attempts at gaining legitimacy
for their own versions of Chaos Magick or any changes they are making to
some of the more established ideas that preceded them.


THE TEXTS OF CHAOS MAGICK

There are quite a number of primary texts on Chaos Magick currently in print.
Many of the texts have been reproduced in electronic versions and are readily
available online, and while some of these have been illegally distributed, oth-
ers are self-published e-books allowing the author access to a broad audience.
The e-books often contain instructions to copy the book and pass it on to as
many people as possible. This is not surprising, as early adoption of online
communication and distribution is very common among religious innovators
of the 1980s and 1990s. This study will restrict itself to the primary texts by a
number of authors associated with the emergence and development of Chaos
Magick. Due to limited space a number of other authors are not included.
The literature presented serves the overall thesis well and represents the more
popular and pervasive texts. Peter Carroll and Ray Sherwin will constitute the
bulk of the representative literature. The second wave of authors on Chaos
Magick began in the mid-1980s, and contributions by Phil Hine, Julian Wilde
and Joel Biroco will form the representative literature for this later period.
   There are two other related developments that run parallel with Chaos
Magick as it is described in this chapter: Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth
and Discordianism. Limited space allows for only a brief description of these
and a word on how all three are related. The first of these, Thee Temple ov
Psychick Youth (TOPY), was formed in 1981 and is most often associated with
Genesis P-Orridge.17 It is described by Partridge as “arguably the most sig-
nificant organized, online occult community”,18 and it was instrumental in the
spread of Chaos Magick-related ideas and resources. TOPY was a loose (but
highly effective) network of artists and magicians who were, like the magi-
cians discussed in this chapter, influenced by occultists Aleister Crowley and
Austin Osman Spare, and used sigil magic as a core element of their prac-
tice. This is most evident in the two main texts: Thee Grey Book and Thee Sigil
Book.19 However, TOPY was also strongly influenced by the writer William S.
Burroughs and the artist Brion Gysin. The performance art aspect of TOPY
expressed itself in many ways, most notably through the band Psychic TV, and
their interaction with the art scene throughout the 1980s is just one reason


 17. For discussion on these subjects, see Chapter 6 of this volume.
 18. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 159.
 19. Thee Grey Book was first published in 1982 and Thee Sigil Book (aka Thee Black Book) was
     first published in 1983. Versions of both of these texts were republished in P-Orridge, Thee
     Psychick Bible, 35–57 and 83–99, respectively.


                                                                                             95
colin duggan



why it deserves to be treated as a parallel development rather than subsumed
into a general discussion on Chaos Magick. The second of these parallel devel-
opments is Discordianism. Kerry Thornley and Gregory Hill claim to have
founded Discordianism in 1958 or 1959 after a revelatory experience at a
bowling alley in a Los Angeles suburb. According to their text, the Principia
Discordia, “Both order and disorder are manmade concepts and are artificial
divisions of PURE CHAOS, which is a level deeper than the level of distinc-
tion making.”20 This engagement with the concept of chaos is similar to that
of Chaos Magick and is reminiscent of the occultism of Crowley and Spare.
Discordianism places a lot of emphasis on humour; the Principia Discordia
states that “occultists have been blinded to what is [sic] perhaps the two most
important pairs of apparent or earth-plane opposites: ORDER/DISORDER
and SERIOUS/HUMOROUS”.21 There are clear relationships and similarities
between the three developments mentioned here and the division is largely an
artificial one. A longer discussion on Chaos Magick would certainly include
both of the developments that were left out and could properly trace the con-
nections between the groups and figures involved.
   As previously observed, Chaos Magick emerged with the publications of
Carroll and Sherwin in 1978. From 1976, both of these authors were pub-
lishing articles in Sherwin’s own magazine The New Equinox, and it was
this medium that was used to announce the formation of the Illuminates of
Thanateros (IOT), one of Chaos Magick’s most notable groups. 1981 saw the
publication of Carroll’s second book, Psychonaut, while Sherwin’s second
publication, The Theatre of Magick, followed in 1982. Other texts used here
are Phil Hine’s three-volume work Techniques of Modern Shamanism (pub-
lished in 1989–9022 and sometimes called the Urban Shaman Trilogy) and
Condensed Chaos, first published in 1992 and now available online as Oven-
Ready Chaos. Julian Wilde’s Grimoire of Chaos Magick represents a slightly
different take on Chaos Magick, particularly in terms of the tradition he con-
structs. Finally, Joel Biroco’s 2002 publication of KAOS 14, the fourteenth issue
of his Chaos Magick magazine, will be discussed in relation to the legitimizing
of innovation.
   There were many other authors writing about Chaos Magick in the mag-
azines that were published during the height of its popularity. Through the