The winds that ushered in this more temperate climate within which esoteri-
cism has flourished have been guided by the broad contours of moderniza-
tion and related cultural influences, from Romanticism to Easternization.3 We
might, for example, consider the ways in which modern societies and political
systems have witnessed a shift towards individualization, the result of which
has been a turn away from deference to traditional sources of authority, and a
turn towards personal experience and freedom of choice. It is also worth not-
ing that Western modernity has been shaped by colonialism, in that not only
has there arguably been significant Easternization,4 particularly evident in
Theosophical currents, but that this has included a conspicuous orientalism,5
which has, in turn, significantly supported the turn to the self. This, again, has
all provided a climate favourable to the growth of esotericism. Furthermore,
late modern capitalist societies, characterized by unprecedented levels of afflu-
ence, have become sites of conspicuous consumption within which spiritual-
ity, therapy and the pursuit of wellbeing have become commodified, marketed,
branded and invested with economic value.6 Of course, for many Westerners
born since 1960, this is not an odd state of affairs. Because they have been
shaped by a culture of consumption, they have, as Wade Clark Roof has com-
mented, “looked on [spirituality] in much the same way as other purchasable
goods”.7 While this does not necessarily reduce esotericism and the pursuit of
spirituality to the profit motive, it does link it, along with other lifestyle acqui-
sitions, to identity and the construction of the self. Added to this, globalization
and technological advance have led to rapid recent changes in people’s life-
styles, the corresponding result of which has been ever more complex changes
to our self-identities.8 Indeed, in the 1970s, Ronald Inglehart persuasively
argued that the affluence of post-industrial societies had created a situation
in which individual values were being transformed from ­materialist values,


   3. See Partridge, Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1; Woodhead & Heelas, Religion in Modern
      Times; Heelas, Spiritualities of Life; Colin Campbell, The Easternization of the West.
   4. See Partridge, Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 87–118; Colin Campbell, The Eastern­
      ization of the West.
   5. See Partridge, “Lost Horizon”.
   6. See Einstein, Brands of Faith.
   7. Roof, A Generation of Seekers, 195.
   8. See Robertson, Globalization; Clarke, New Religions in Global Perspective.


114
                                                                        occulture is ordinary



which focused on the securing of life’s basic necessities, to post-­materialist
values, which emphasized self-expression, subjectivization, and experience.9
However, the point is that such post-materialist values provide fertile ground
for contemporary esotericism, the claimed effect of much of which is, gener-
ally speaking, personal empowerment, metamorphosis, and liberation through
the acquisition of illuminated knowledge (gnosis) and, as such, the developing
of one’s potential as a human being in relation to the cosmos. In other words,
in affluent, information-rich, self-oriented societies, in which our basic needs
are catered for, we have the time to seek and the money to purchase experi-
ences and lifestyles.
   Finally, in recent years, it is difficult to ignore the findings of studies
which suggest that generational repositioning has contributed to subjec-
tivization, post-materialism, and a culture within which esotericism flour-
ishes. For example, in their study of post-Christian spirituality, Stef Aupers
and Dick Houtman argue that this is largely driven by cohort replacement, in
that younger generations with stronger affinities to, and a greater penchant
for, post-Christian spirituality have simply replaced an older generation for
whom this was not the case.10 This concurs with other research indicating a
shift from the religious patterns of pre-baby-boomers (who came of age in the
1960s) to the largely self-oriented spirituality of Generation X (born between
1961 and 1981). Key to this shift, of course, was the rise of youth culture and
the increased influence of popular culture, both of which have contributed to
an independence from the values of the previous generation. Moreover, this
was a generation born into an affluent society that enabled the exercise of that
independence and to challenge, what appeared to be, the flawed values of the
previous generation – values which had walked them into Vietnam, the Cuban
Missile Crisis, Watergate, and much more. Generation Y (born between 1982
and 2000) have, as well as continuing to benefit from higher rates of education
and affluence, not to mention the growth of information technologies (“the
Internet is one of the most important places where Witches meet”11), become
increasingly alienated from traditional religiosity.12 As Peter Brierley has shown
of church attendance in the UK, “undoubtedly the biggest shift age-wise in
the church in recent years was the huge decline in numbers of young people
in the 1990s”.13 Influenced far more by popular culture and ­subcultural peer

   9. See Inglehart, Culture Shift in Advanced Industrial Society; Inglehart & Abramson,
      “Measuring Postmaterialism”. Interestingly, from a different perspective, Frank Furedi has
      made a similar point concerning the new highly individualized and emotivist therapeutic
      culture in which the self is perceived to be diminished and vulnerable and in which “virtu-
      ally every challenge or misfortune that confronts people is represented as a direct threat to
      their emotional well-being” (Furedi, Therapy Culture, 1).
 10. Houtman & Aupers, “The Spiritual Turn and the Decline of Tradition”.
 11. Berger & Ezzy, Teenage Witches, 139. See also Cowan, Cyberhenge; Erik Davis, Techgnosis.
 12. See Tomasi, Alternative Religions Among European Youth.
 13. Brierley, Pulling Out of the Nosedive, 112.


                                                                                              115
christopher partridge



pressure, there has, again, been a shift away from the authoritarian aspects of
religion and toward the creation of personal spiritual paths. As Helen Berger
and Douglas Ezzy comment of contemporary Wicca in their study of teenage
witchcraft, “the emphasis in ritual and in all self-­transformation techniques is
individual discovery and self-development. There is no clear list of behaviours,
such as those that exist in Islam, Judaism, or Christianity, that adherents are
expected to change or adopt.”14
   The evidence, therefore, would seem to suggest that Western culture is not
becoming less religious, but rather that it is, for a variety of reasons, becoming
differently religious. Rather than becoming secularized it is, as I have argued
elsewhere, witnessing a confluence of secularization and sacralization, at the
heart of which is a deceptively powerful “occulture”.15 Even if individuals are
not convinced of all the claims made by particular spiritualities, philosophies
or esoteric systems, there is, nevertheless, a conspicuous interest in them and
a growing credulity concerning their plausibility. Indeed, there appears to be a
constantly replenished reservoir of beliefs and practices associated with eso-
tericism, Theosophy, mysticism, neopaganism, the paranormal, and a range
of other ideas from the bizarre to the familiar, a reservoir that is constantly
feeding and being fed by popular culture.16 In order to adequately theorize
and organize these processes, I introduced the category of occulture. Just as,
arguably, occult and magical thought was once a widespread familiar feature
of Western societies, in the sense that their members possessed a conscious-
ness that genuinely participated in an enchanted world,17 so today, particularly
since the 1960s, we are witnessing the increasing ordinariness of occulture.
   Occulture, as a sociological term, refers to the environment within which,
and the social processes by which particular meanings relating, typically,
to spiritual, esoteric, paranormal and conspiratorial ideas emerge, are dis-
seminated, and become influential in societies and in the lives of individu-
als. Central to these processes is popular culture, in that it disseminates and
remixes occultural ideas, thereby incubating new spores of occultural thought.
For example, whether one considers the ideas articulated in television series
such as Dark Skies, The X-Files and Supernatural, films such as Rosemary’s
Baby (1968), The Wicker Man (1973), Angel Heart (1987), Contact (1997), The
Sixth Sense (1999) and Paranormal Activity (2007), the claims made for the
phenomena captured in reality television programmes such as Ghost Hunters
and Most Haunted, the conspiratorial ideas developed in books such as The


 14. Berger & Ezzy, Teenage Witches, 34.
 15. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West; Partridge, “Alternative Spiritualities, New
     Religions, and the Reenchantment of the West”.
 16. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 65. See also Kripal, Authors of the
     Impossible.
 17. See Frances Yates, The Occult Philosophy in the Elizabethan Age; Berman, The Reenchant­
     ment of the World.


116
                                                                     occulture is ordinary



Stargate Conspiracy, Holy Blood, Holy Grail and The Da Vinci Code,18 or the
ideological themes and styles disseminated within popular music and acted
out within their attendant subcultures,19 popular (oc)culture provides a space
within which there is an openness to the possibility of metaphysical interpre-
tation. For the scholar of religion this is, of course, important, in that popular
culture becomes a significant area of inquiry as an agent of contemporary re-
enchantment.20 However, it is no easy task mapping the flow of ideas and the
creation and dissolution of synergies, whether in popular culture or elsewhere.
So rapid is the flow that once mapped, occultural content quickly becomes
passé.


OCCULTURE, THE OCCULT AND THE CULTIC MILIEU

In the early 1970s, the British sociologist Colin Campbell observed that cul-
tic organizations seem to arise out of a general cultural ethos, a cultic milieu,
which, he argued,