society” and the “traditional pagan” one. It became clear that the radical right
does not view Christianity as a European phenomenon, despite its dominance
in Europe for over a thousand years. The radical right looks at Christianity as
something that is das ganz Andere (“the wholly other”), not in a metaphysical
sense as originally implied by Rudolf Otto, but as something essentially dif-
ferent and foreign to European identity. Furthermore, Christianity is seen as
one of the primary catalysts for the emergence of liberalism, egalitarianism,
modernity, and the “Entzauberung” (“disenchantment”) of the world – all of
which are seen as detrimental to the European peoples. The strong dualism
that Christianity entails was foreign to the European worldview, according to
New Right thinkers such as de Benoist and Sigrid Hunke.
   According to the New Right, the “European” alternative to Christianity is
pre-Christian religion. This, however, does not imply that Europeans should
return to the past and reinstate the worship of Zeus or Wotan, but rather that
so-called pagan values and ideals should be adopted as the basis of postmod-
ern society, constituting a form of archeofuturism91 with the mix of antique
ideals in a futuristic world. Thinkers like Hunke helped define this alterna-
tive to Christianity with her concept of a “pagan revival” in the Christian era,
and Indo-European myths and societal constructions are seen not only as a
description of the past, but also as an instruction for the future organization of
small tribal communities and male warrior fraternities, the Männerbunde. The
radical right thus weaves its own tale of Europe’s pagan past, in which it con-
strues itself as herald of a new age, unfettered by Christianity and its “children”,
egalitarianism, individualism, and liberal capitalism.
   Despite the fact that “paganism” as a future ideal for Europe might seem
utopian, if not outright absurd, the radical right does resonate with at least
some Europeans that have been alienated from modern consumerist culture.
The right has experienced a growing following of adolescents with a postmod-
ern loss of identity, searching for a sense of belonging and believing, as a result
of the loss of grand narratives. Followers of the radical right are Europeans in
search of meaning and coherence in a world perceived full of arbitrary and
capricious events, utilizing politics of identity as their means, and a revival of
“pagan values” as their goal.




 91. See Faye, Archeofuturism.


264
chapter 13

NEW AGE SPIRITUALITY AND ISLAMIC JIHAD
PAULO COELHO’S MANUAL OF THE WARRIOR OF LIGHT AND
SHAMIL BASAYEV’S MANUAL OF THE MUJAHID

Eduard ten Houten


       So fight in the cause of God; you are answerable only to yourself.
       And encourage the believers.1

On the face of it, New Age spirituality and post-9/11 violent Islam are irrecon-
cilable forms of contemporary religiosity. Even as they may both announce the
worldwide replacement of traditional religious authority by religious (hyper-)
individualism, their doctrinal content seems to diverge too much to warrant
an attempt at comparison. On the pedestrian level, as global phenomena, the
contrast could indeed hardly be greater. New Age is seen as having brought
comfort, self-worth and a sense of meaning to millions of ordinary people
who struggle to find their identity in a world-system that increasingly mar-
ginalizes the genuine, the authentic and the sacred; whereas, it would seem,
militant Islam has killed thousands and terrorizes millions in the name of a
totalitarian religious ideology.
   That there are affinities between New Age and Islamic jihad ideologies
despite the seemingly unbridgeable differences can be shown in a concrete
and very direct manner. In March 2004, the world-famous Chechen freedom
fighting terrorist-cum-regional-jihad leader Shamil Basayev (1965–2006)
appropriated, edited and redistributed under his own name a book written by
one of the world’s bestselling authors: the Brazilian New Age superstar Paulo
Coelho (b. 1947).
   In generous, deadpan and open fashion, Basayev acknowledged Coelho’s
primary authorship in the preamble to his version:

       In late March of this year [2004] I had two weeks of free time,
       when one day I found myself with Paulo Coelho’s book Manual of
       the Warrior of Light and a computer. Wanting to derive benefits for

   1. The Qur’an, 4: 84.


                                                                             265
eduard ten houten



         Mujahidin from this book, I rewrote a large part of it by removing
         some of the excesses and strengthening it all with ayat, hadith and
         stories from the lives of the Sahaba.2

Retitled Kniga Mudzhakhida (henceforth Manual of the Mujahid), the hybrid
text was published on a trusted Chechen Islamist propaganda website in July
2004, where it has been promoted ever since as providing “the vital philoso-
phy of the Mojahid, his character, experience, and a tactical and strategic idea
… described in the art form and from position of the Islam [sic].”3 Basayev, too,
evidently intended his book to conform to “position of the Islam”:

         Bismillah ir-Rahman ir-Rahim! Praise be to Allah, Lord of the
         Worlds, Who created us as Muslims and Who blessed us with
         Jihad on His Straight Path! Peace and Blessing be to the Prophet
         Muhammad, to his family, to his disciples and to all who follow
         the Straight Path until the Day of Judgment! And then: If some-
         thing from what I wrote does not correspond with the Qur’an and
         the Sunna of the Prophet (peace be upon him), then I renounce it
         and ask Allah to forgive me my transgressions out of ignorance.
         … I have written it exclusively hoping for Allah’s mercy and for
         Mujahidin to derive benefit from it for themselves and for the
         Jihad. There is neither might nor power except with Allah! Allahu
         Akbar!4

Anyone cursorily acquainted with the tone of Coelho’s inspirational novels
and Basayev’s capacity for astounding violence against the unarmed will won-
der what possible benefit Basayev thought his mujahidin5 could derive from a
book like that; and, more generally, what Basayev appreciated in a book that,
to western European eyes, so strongly emanates the cocooning, self-centred
soft-focus spirituality of the awareness-minded middle classes.
   This essay is not concerned with Coelho’s popularity, however, nor with
typologies of New Age and jihad ideology, or their development and ori-
gins. Much more limited in scope, it seeks to reconstruct the genesis of the
Manual of the Mujahid through an exploration of the affinities and differences
between the mentality, sentiments, beliefs and experiences captured by Paulo
Coelho’s Manual of the Warrior of Light, and the mentality, sentiments, beliefs
and experiences of Shamil Basayev. It does so by discussing a number of more


   2.   Basayev, “Kniga Mudzhakhida”.
   3.   Kavkaz Tsentr, “Book of Mujahiddeen”.
   4.   Basayev, “Kniga Mudzhakhida”; cf. Qur’an 1: 1–7.
   5.   Throughout, when the word is capitalized, I refer to the “ideal” Mujahid of the Kniga; non-
        capitalized instances refer to Chechens fighting their jihad. In Basayev’s statements the
        word is consistently capitalized.


266
                                                        new age spirituality and islamic jihad



or less concrete questions. How did Basayev live when he received the text
and how did this influence his reading? What did he scrap, keep, or change
and why? Why did he do anything at all with the text?
   To answer these questions, we must not only zoom in on the two texts,
but also consider a number of concrete preconditions, including the cir-
cumstances in which Shamil Basayev found himself when he picked up the
Manual in early 2004; the kind of life he had led up to that time; some of
the specifics of the struggle he was engaged in; and the cultural assumptions
with which he approached the book. If we do this, we shall find that, odd as
it may seem, the glorification of fighting in the cause of God (i.e. jihad) which
informs the Manual of the Mujahid was not added by Basayev. It was already
present, albeit in disguise.
   Before we begin, a few final notes of a practical nature are in order. For
considerations of space I have chosen not to include many Qur’anic ref-
erences, even though I suspect that, to a Muslim eye, part of the Manual’s
potential attraction lies in its use of prophetic rhetoric akin at times to that of
the Qur’an. For identical considerations I have omitted completely Coelho’s
and force-marched through Basayev’s career, presupposing on the side of the
reader some general knowledge of the tenets and background of New Age,6 as
well as the history, complexity and brutality of the Chechen conflict.7
   Our exploration will be guided by side-by-side comparisons of selected
passages. To prevent the “Chinese whispers” effect produced by both books’
translation routes – Portuguese to English and Portuguese to Russian to
English, respectively – from obscuring the similarities, I have chosen to treat
the English and Russian translations as if they are the same. That is to say, if
my rendition of one of Basayev’s originally Russian passages differs from the
corresponding passage in HarperCollins’s British edition of Coelho’s Manual,
this is, with one footnoted exception, always because Basayev made changes
to the Russian translation.