c­ oherence – meaning – to a people’s activities, laws and world view”.63 The
existence of a tradition, a common heritage of habits and beliefs, is seen as
essential for the survival of a people, and thus the pre-Christian myths are
needed in order to actualize a new renaissance in Europe. Indo-European pre-
history is seen as indispensable, as it ascertains the common origins of the
European peoples, and it is a common focal point among various radical
right groups to focus on the Indo-European heritage. De Benoist states that a
“spiritual” and “intuitive” familiarity with the Indo-Europeans is necessary in
order to understand the underlying values that are also relevant to Europeans
today.64 Likewise, other New Right thinkers see the Indo-Europeans as the
essential key to understand “our identity”.65 An example of how the “Indo-
European heritage” is used as the ideal can be seen in the frequent references
to the so-called Männerbünde, indigenous Indo-European “warrior-bands”, in
the New Right.66 These are admired and viewed as worthy of emulation since
they are said to have valued ideas such as honour, courage and loyalty, mani-
festing an order superior to clan and individual interests.67
    Having now provided examples of esoteric transfers within the radical right,
as well as having identified the clear dichotomy between modern Christian
and anti-modern “pagan” worldviews that we can see here, we will now search
for possible explanations to the frequent intermingling of esotericism with the
right, and the dichotomy outlined above.


POLITICS AS ESOTERIC COUNTERCULTURE AND POLEMICAL NARRATIVE

The radical right utilizes esotericism, and in many instances takes part in a
polemical discourse against “the establishment” which is similar to a mode of
polemics found in esoteric sources. It thus makes sense to look at a few of the
theories within the study of esotericism and consider to what extent these can
also be applied to a political phenomenon such as that of the radical right. I
am here in particular thinking of theories of polemical discourse, “othering”,
and the construction of “grand polemical narratives”; theories which may help
explain the structural and ideological similarities present in the radical right


 63. Ibid., 103. On Eliade’s connection to the construction of tradition, see Chapter 2 of this
     volume.
 64. De Benoist, On Being a Pagan, 15.
 65. Haudry, “Die Indoeuropäische Tradition als Wurzel unserer Identität”, 107; Day, “In Quest
     of Our Linguistic Ancestors”.
 66. This topic is prominent in the writings of Day, Hunke and Haudry, and in Weissmann’s
     Männerbund. See Wikander, Der Arische Männerbund, which presents the original the-
     ory of these warrior-bands, and Kershaw, The One-Eyed God; Brunotte, Zwischen Eros und
     Krieg, which represent the current state of research in this field.
 67. O’Meara, New Culture, New Right, 70.



258
                                                  radical politics and political esotericism



and esotericism.68 I will argue that we find similar approaches to hegemonic
thought both within the radical right and within esoteric currents influenced
by anti-establishment and countercultural ideas.69
   Starting with the structure of esotericism and the radical right, there are
several obvious similarities, in particular as esotericism has been constructed
since the 1960s as part of a countercultural trend, critical of modernity. Both
the radical right and countercultural esotericism could be labelled “fringe
movements”; they go “against the stream”, acting as a counter-current, con-
structing their own polemical narratives against the establishment in the
pro­cess.70 Both can at least partially be explained by regarding the various mar-
ginal groups involved as forming a “cultic milieu”. Historically, a similar, almost
identical structure can be identified between the two. Esotericism experienced
a popularization in the 1960s, protruding as part of the blossoming milieu of
the 1960s counterculture, both in the United States and in Europe. The trends
of the counterculture and the sexual revolution persisted, instead of vanish-
ing in the 1970s like other fads of the time, becoming “a permanent feature of
contemporary culture”.71 Similarly, the radical right, with the formation of the
Nouvelle Droite (the New Right) in France in 1968, shortly before the student
riots in Paris, became a permanent feature in modern European politics.72 One
might write off these historical instances of similarity as pure coincidence;
however, they are not only structural, but also ideological. The New Right ide-
ologically belongs to, or at least draws great inspiration from, what Hanegraaff
calls the “religionist–counterculturalist” understanding of esotericism, which
was primarily represented by the Eranos meetings in Ascona.73 Being involved
with the countercultural religionists of Eranos invites the same kind of issues
that de Benoist and other proponents of the radical right encountered when



 68. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to explain the theories of polemics within religion
     and esotericism in detail. For a volume exemplifying this approach, see Hammer & von
     Stuckrad, Polemical Encounters. The idea of Western esotericism constructed by a “Grand
     Polemical Narrative” is outlined in Hanegraaff, “Forbidden Knowledge”.
 69. It should be pointed out that, historically, esotericism has fluctuated in and out of respecta-
     bility and mainstream culture. Here, however, I am talking about esotericism as it emerged
     as an essentialized construct in the twentieth century, especially related to the countercul-
     ture of the 1960s. For a more detailed examination of esotericism as variously mainstream,
     anti-establishment, and countercultural, see Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”.
 70. It is important here to note that esotericism for the countercultural movement is used as an
     oppositional construct against modernity, and that this construct is likewise projected back
     on history, in an attempt to present the “essence” of esotericism as something inherently
     anti-modern and anti-establishment.
 71. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”, 18.
 72. For an overview of the current constellation of right-wing parties in European parliaments,
     see Ignazi, Extreme Right Parties in Europe.
 73. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”, 7.



                                                                                               259
jacob christiansen senholt



 professing their political views in public.74 They were certain to evoke strong
 emotions, to inspire a combination of curiosity and repulsion, as well as the
 risk of stigmatization; in short, both were prone to accusations of acting sim-
 ply as another type of counterculture. The counterculture of the 1960s was
 thus not only important for, and influential on, scholars of religion such as
 Mircea Eliade and Henry Corbin, new religious movements in general, and
 the New Age movement in particular; it was also, I will argue, a key influence
 on the development of the radical right. In this regard, the radical right could
 also be regarded as simply another form of counterculture.
    Just as Eranos and the rise of new religious movements evinced a search
 and continued interest in religious alternatives to Christianity, so the radi-
 cal right was dissatisfied with European spirituality under Christian “rule”.
 According to Hanegraaff, a narrative of esotericism where “the Hermetic
 Tradition” is seen as a countercultural undercurrent battling Christianity
 on the one hand and rationalism and science on the other, was unwillingly
 established by Frances Yates through her influential Giordano Bruno and the
 Hermetic Tradition. It is this narrative, which posits a suppressed and tradi-
 tional counterculture as “rebelling against forces of the establishment”,75 that
 is unconsciously adapted by the radical rightists. Polemics of late Antiquity
 were mostly Christian, directed towards “pagans and heretics”, as well as devi-
 ant versions of Christianity, and the polemics of today are structurally very
 similar.76 In both, a dichotomy between “us” and “them” is ­constructed. The
only difference is that the current polemics are defined largely from the other
side, with intellectuals from the radical right arguing against Christianity as a
European heresy.
    Sociologist Göran Dahl provides a crude (but nonetheless instruc-
tive) dichotomy, when trying to explain the New Right, acknowledging the
power of attraction of a system of thought that offers alternative solutions to
­modern-day problems (Table 12.1). The table illustrates quite well a divide
 that was originally constructed as a monotheist polemic against “pagan idola-
 try”. This dichotomy increased throughout history, from Christian Antiquity,
 which polemically posited a reified Gnosticism as its “other”, to later Christian
 opposition to magic, occultism and “demon-worship”.77 On these grounds
 Hanegraaff argues that esotericism has been constructed by a “grand polemi-
 cal narrative” within Western culture, a development that accelerated with the
 advent of Protestant and Enlightenment polemics.



 74. See Ellwood, The Politics of Myth, which provides an overview of the political views implicit
     in the theories of three influential counterculturalists: Joseph Campbell, Mircea Eliade and
     C. G. Jung.
 75. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”, 16–18.
 76. Hammer & von Stuckrad, “Introduction”, ix.
 77. Hanegraaff, “Forbidden Knowledge”, 225–39.


260
                                                 radical politics and political esotericism


Table 12.1 Pagan–Christian dichotomy.78

Pagan/European                                  Jewish/Christian/American
Community*                                      Individualism
Idealism                                        Materialism
Belonging to a hierarchy                        Egalitarianism
Polytheism                                      Monotheism
Respect for nature                              Dominance of nature
* My translation. The Swedish word is “gemenskap”, derived from the German Gemeinschaft, and has
more connotations than the English word “community”.


In opposition to this, “esotericists” responded to the polemical narrative by
inverting it, and adapting it as their own: