concerned, well-meaning parents. The Indigo Child discourse has grown into
a global discourse, a part of mass culture. As such it has created a huge inter-
national market for books, seminars, films, and even specialized schools to
train Indigo Children and their parents. Eager parents are more than willing to
pay for their special child to get special training, a special diet and play special
educational games tailored to their Indigo needs.
   An example of this trend towards consumer products can be found in the
form of CosmiKids, a corporation that offers products and classes tailored to
help children “achieve the clarity necessary to recognize the path they were
meant to follow”.74 CosmiKids is a business, with local storefront outlets,
which is intended to supplement the regular teaching that children receive
in school and through extracurricular activities. It was started by the current
CEO, Judy Julin, in 2003. Inspiration “came out of necessity” while working at
the Chopra Centre, where a practice developed.75 All children are welcome
and a special focus is given to their ability to work with children with learn-
ing difficulties and mental or physical disabilities. Children and parents can
go to the CosmiKids location for seminars, after-school play sessions, sum-
mer camps, or to arrange a private session at their own home for a special
event. CosmiKids products are focused on “self-exploration” as the company
sees this as an essential part of a child’s development process. Their goal is to:

        encourage children to explore who they truly are in mind, body
        and spirit – their likes and dislikes, their greatest joys and ­deepest
        fears, how they relate to the world and the people in it. We help
        them learn to trust their intuition and how to tell the difference
        between what is real and authentic and what is unnecessary noise.
        With each new revelation a child’s sense of confidence is strength-
        ened, forming a solid foundation of self-esteem that will exist no
        matter the situation because it’s pure, true and organic, not fash-
        ioned by peer pressure or socially imposed guidelines.76

A child who attends CosmiKids seminars or playtimes can be expected to
gain a “more mindful and conscious attitude about themselves and the world
around them” and there might be an increase in the quantity of “smiles, hugs,
life questions, thank yous and pleases” from the child. In addition there “have
been reports of increasing incidences involving the words ‘I love you.’”77 The
store front offers specialized magazines, books, games, party packages, and
educational toys for “inspired parenting”. There are also numerous events such
as special parenting seminars; support networks for homeschooling parents;

 74.   CosmiKids, “About Us”.
 75.   Ibid.
 76.   Ibid.
 77.   Ibid.


                                                                                  367
daniel kline



workshops for kids on numerous subjects to express creativity, learn about
themselves, experience the joy of giving and receiving, and “Angel Bear Yoga”.
   CosmiKids is offering a form of language very familiar to New Age par-
ents. This is the discursive style of the wellness magazine, self-help book or
self-­actualization guide. There is a market for the CosmiKids style of “inspired
parenting”. Parents in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries have
become increasingly concerned with the activities and lives of their children.
In addition, New Age and wellbeing culture have raised serious concerns
about the types of play and the types of food that children are consuming.
Furthermore, these parents seek to instil their progeny with similar values, and
so may feel that they need the cultural trappings and commodities to accom-
plish this. Finally, the Indigo Child discourse underlies the whole CosmiKids
business model although Indigo Children are not explicitly mentioned on their
website. CosmiKids was featured in the film Indigo Evolution. It is one of the
many companies to capitalize upon the growing market for New Age products
targeted at children. There are numerous books, seminars, workshops and
other opportunities available to participate in the Indigo discourse.78
   A self-professed sceptic, Lorie Anderson has written an online paper enti-
tled “Indigo: The Color of Money” in which she notes, with some derision and
disdain, the large amount of money that is being made by Indigo Child‑based
New Age authors and speakers.79 In particular Anderson attacks the work of
James Twyman, the man behind the aforementioned movies Indigo and Indigo
Evolution. She seeks to discredit his work by pointing out the lack of scientific
support for his various claims, the danger of encouraging children with vari-
ous behavioural problems, mental illness, or mental disabilities to believe that
they are psychic, and has accused Twyman of collecting donations for fraudu-
lent purposes. Anderson offers a “cautionary commentary to my community,
Ashland, Oregon (and to the world)”, seeing herself as protecting people from
fraudulent beliefs and superstition.
   Her critique is typical of the sceptics’ movement, which often positions
itself against New Age beliefs and alternative medicine.80 Often, sceptics are
not professionals in the fields that they criticize, but rely upon the scientific
work of others. Olav Hammer defines sceptics as those “who are thoroughly
un-sceptical of the foundations of the modern, scientific worldview” and are
thus “sceptical of particular sets of propositions because they are problematic
when viewed from the perspective of these normative methods”.81 In partic-
ular they tend to target suppositions that are “prevalent in popular culture”
such as urban legends and paranormal experiences.82 The New Age movement


 78.   See e.g. Roseberry New Age Centre, “Kids”; Aquarian Dreams, “Aquarian Dreams”.
 79.   Lorie Anderson, “Indigo”.
 80.   Hammer, “New Age Religion and the Sceptics”.
 81.   Ibid., 382.
 82.   Ibid.


368
                                                                    the new kids



has been a particular target. Sceptics often see New Age practice as danger-
ous and fraudulent, an abuse of science, and so seek to prove the New Agers
wrong and liberate the truth.83 It is clear that some of the sceptics are more
involved in (or knowledgeable about) the actual practice of scientific experi-
mentation and reasoning than their New Age antagonists, but both sides often
utilize the same rhetoric and both assert that scientific evidence is on their
side. Ironically, both groups make similar claims to scientific proof for their
arguments. They see the opposition as irrational and dogmatic in their adher-
ence to their beliefs despite the evidence.84 Both views are clearly ideological
standpoints. Both sceptics and proponents of New Age thinking utilize the
rhetoric of science to legitimize their claims within the greater Indigo Child
discourse.


CHILDREN OF THE BABY BOOMERS

Another figure who weighs in on the sceptic side in the Indigo Child discourse
is self-identified Christian columnist John D. Spalding. His online essay, enti-
tled “Brood Indigo”, describes the relationship between Indigo Children and
the ideals of the “baby boomer” generation. Spalding claims that the Indigos
are a projection of the failed ideals of their parents’ generation. He says that
“it doesn’t take a metaphysicist to explain that the offspring of Baby Boomers,
raised on the vocabulary of self-help and New Age thinking, might speak a
spiritual language earlier generations didn’t”.85 Spalding unfortunately does not
enter into an analytical criticism of the Indigo phenomenon in comparison
to “baby boomer” values. He does highlight the baby boomer idealization of
“what Rousseau called the ‘vigor of youth’” and notes that the “Indigo Children
are supposed to save the world – just like their Boomer parents set out to do.”
The rest of his article consists of his personal inquiry into the phenomenon
including discussions with major figures including Doreen Virtue. She, in her
own book, seems to mirror his thoughts on the baby boomers, stating that:

        In the 1960s, many of the first Indigos (often referred to as “hip-
        pies”) were given the assignment to bring integrity to our govern-
        ment and other systems. But they got distracted by heavy drug
        usage, became disheartened by the Vietnam War and Watergate,
        and later got sidetracked by mainstream responsibilities.86

Spalding quotes a moderator at a seminar who states that Indigos are:

 83.   Ibid., 396.
 84.   Hess, Science in the New Age, 15.
 85.   Spalding, “Brood Indigo”.
 86.   Virtue, The Care and Feeding of Indigo Children, 41.


                                                                              369
daniel kline



      the Children of New Age Parents … and they’re smarter, more
      gifted, and more confident than any previous generation. I know
      the Indigo Children and they’re far more spiritually aware and
      eloquent than my generation was at their age. They will save the
      planet.