this enterprise”.22 These assumptions include the degree to which contempo-
rary gender stereotypes are taken up and reproduced by group members. The
strong membership of current and ex-military personnel in American Ásatrú,
for example, has engendered very active masculine roles and groups like the
Brotherhood of the Sacred Hunt, while Icelandic Ásatrú is figured more prom-
inently as an aspect of national cultural heritage that underlies the lived reality
of day-to-day life.23 As such, although normative gender roles still feature, the
degree of retrospective, “romantic” stereotyping does not seem as acute.24 In
both cases it seems clear that the dominant socio-cultural and historical con-
text of the specific groups directly affect their interpretation of gender, as well
as the degree to which the group defines itself either in defiance or in support
of the dominant cultural tropes.
   In further contradistinction, Jenny Blain identifies (in the same root tradi-
tion) forms of subversive gender identities. She provides an innovative appli-
cation of queer theory (elucidated in more detail below) to present a reading of
seidr (magic) practitioners as inhabiting unstable and queer gender identities.25
   It is the “shamanic” associations with seidr practices that underpin the flu-
idity of subjectivity that Blain proposes. Indeed, the general assumption that
shamanic practice involves the capacity for embodied transformation across
gender-binary and species (human–non-human) is most certainly a platform
for destabilizing gender and human-centric identity. This feature is clearly evi-
dent in contemporary Otherkin discourse, where for some practitioners part
of the appeal is the potential for gender ambiguity that their non-human self
imparts (be it animal, spiritual being, elf, faery, mystical beast, etc.). Therian
(animal–human) Lupa demonstrates a strong awareness of contemporary
gender theory and debates in hir Field Guide to Otherkin where she/he argues
that with an Otherkin identity dimorphic gender distinction become increas-
ingly nebulous and inept: hence the use of non-specific pronouns like “hir”
and “she/he”. 26
   Otherkin is an umbrella term, and the individuals and groups it is employed
to signify do not necessarily approve of, or use it. Nonetheless, the term itself
signifies the challenge to dominate concepts of the human that the multiplici-
tous subcultures embrace. Indeed, when Lupa writes of the reasons why she/
he employs gender ambiguous pronouns it is because: “they are very useful
in a day and age where the ideas of sex and gender are becoming less like a
dichotomy and more like a continuum”.27 As already noted, the “reading” of
sexual orientation as the “essence” of self is a core feature of contemporary


 22.   Strmiska, “Ásatrú in Iceland”, 108.
 23.   Strmiska & Sigurvinsson, “Asatru”, 152–3, 174–5.
 24.   My thanks to Egil Asprem for discussion on these issues.
 25.   Blain, Nine Worlds of Seid-Magic, 111–41.
 26.   Lupa, A Field Guide to Otherkin, 26.
 27.   Ibid.


418
                                                      a deliciously troubling duo



concepts of subjectivity. The denial of clear identity labels – or their confusion
by the incorporation of the non-human in an individual’s identity – disrupts
these narratives upon which concepts of the human subject are built. This
is especially acute when the non-human element is a metaphysical being or
beast with ambiguous or unstable gender attribution – the “sexing” of angels
for example. Indeed, even Therian gender identities sit uneasily in dimorphic
schemes. As Myra J. Hird’s work on animal trans has argued, the gender iden-
tity and sexual behaviour of many animal species are “much more plastic and
diverse than human culture allows”.28 Given such, an Otherkin animal–human
“hybrid” subjectivity has the strong potential to trouble – in very useful and
significant ways – the assumed interrelation of stable gender identity and
subjectivity.
    Conceptions of nature in esoteric discourses and traditions are implicitly
intertwined with gender tropes, whether these are academically acknowledged
or not. As the next section will endeavour to illustrate, certain types of knowl-
edge and phenomena are in dominant Western culture gendered in quite spe-
cific ways. The tight coupling of the feminine with nature has been deployed
to argue for female subservience, for dimorphic gender difference, for women’s
“natural” affinity with the environment. Thus it has been positioned as having
had both positive and negative roles in the construction of femininity and its
socio-cultural articulation. Richard Roberts, Susan Greenwood and Elizabeth
Puttick all contribute to the critical analysis of assumed relations between
nature and women (usefully found in the same volume) in an appraisal of con-
temporary nature religions.29 This is a conceptual coupling that while relatively
well investigated in neopagan and neoshamanic practices, can also usefully be
applied to hermeneutic approaches found in the discipline, theories of “living
nature” for example. In particular, analysis could investigate Marsilio Ficino’s
system of correspondences, not only identifying implicit gender ascriptions
of plant, stone, planet, and so on (and the way such gendering has carried
forth into contemporary beliefs and practices), but also considering the way
in which such a “natural” magic might (or might not) challenge and subvert
gender conventions of the period (including the degree to which certain forms
of education were unevenly available to subjects of gender, social, and racial
difference). Such analysis would also necessarily need to question the nature–
culture divide. That is, the degree to which such practices and ideologies were
part of a larger cultural framework that masked the specifically cultural con-
struction of the very concept of “nature”, which in turn enabled the position-
ing of the human as the mediator or interpreter of a divine material, “natural”
language. Can “natural magic” be read (as other narratives about “nature”
have been by feminist philosophers) as discourses that tie the feminine to the


 28. Hird, “Animal Trans”, 235.
 29. Roberts & Samuel, Nature Religion Today.


                                                                              419
jay johnston



­ hysical world, and thereby, by extension, undermine any ascription of reason
p
(in its broadest sense), consciousness and enlightenment to a female gender?
The forms of knowledge used by contemporary animal oracles, and animal
and nature psychics, could also be investigated in the same manner.30 Central
to the questions to be asked – even if absolute answers are necessarily elu-
sive – are to what degree in contemporary esoteric discourses on nature are
gender normative prescriptions reproduced, and to what degree are they chal-
lenged? Where are potential sites of slippage? How has nature as a “trope” for
the pure, the uncivilized, the feminine, even the divine, been central to the
construction of esoteric discourses of magical mastery and power?
   The aforementioned accounts of previous work take as their object of study
either the representation of gender, the attribution of gender roles and subse-
quent practices, or the interface of practitioner/scholar gender identity and
the interpretation of esoteric discourse. In many ways these are the dominant
modes with which the intersectionality of gender and the academic study of
esotericism have thus far been analysed.
   As detailed above, the methodological approaches to gender have been
diverse. There are accounts that consider gender in a specific cultural forma-
tion without critiquing the definitions or prescriptions of the discourse. This is
what Joy refers to as “gender as essentialism”,31 an approach which while recog-
nizing a specific socio-cultural positioning – even those that are marginalized
– does not critique the symbolic logic of dominant values that construct and
maintain gender positions. The other main approach employs the term gender
to signal a concern for deviant or marginalized positions which may or may
not include a critique of discourse formation, what Joy would term “gender as
a mode of subversive disturbance”.32
   It is certain that significant work in the area has been and continues to be
undertaken. However, as previously noted, this is a relatively recent phenom-
ena and the deployment of a neutral (masculine) subject characterizes much
early work in the discipline. It may be that Theosophists referred to the “spir-
itual bodies of man” for example, as a supposedly “neutral” concept of sub-
jectivity (something feminist philosopher Luce Irigaray would argue is not
possible),33 but that is no reason not to note the informing gender bias, if not
explore its socio-cultural foundations. There are enormously rich possibili-
ties for the application of gender theory to further studies of Western eso-
teric practices both in the “recovering” of marginalized figures and practices
– who has been written out of “esoteric” history and why – and in the critical
investigation of the valuation and creation of a spectrum of gender ­positions


 30. As I hope to do in a forthcoming publication with Paul, the (now deceased) octopus who
     predicted the results of World Cup football matches.
 31. Joy, “The Impact of Gender on Religious Studies”, 95.
 32. Ibid., 97.
 33. Irigaray, Speculum of the Other Women.


420
                                                       a deliciously troubling duo