sources and popular cultural products are becoming increasingly influential.
The inclusion of popular culture in the study of contemporary esotericism,
and in particular connected to notions of tradition, furthermore brings old
biases of historical research in the field into question.
    The creation of religious fiction in constructing ethnic and religious identity
is a central theme in Chapter 3. In “Inventing Africa”, Fredrik Gregorius deals
with the creation of a “primordial African tradition” among African American
esoteric spokespersons, a subject matter which has received very little atten-
tion from scholars of Western esotericism. Starting with Prince Hall Masonry
in the late eighteenth century, Gregorius goes on to discuss Afrocentric devel-
opments in the mid-twentieth to the early twenty-first centuries. Particular
attention is given to George G. M. James’s Stolen Legacy from the mid-1950s
(and its own legacy in later Afrocentric thought), Maulana Karenga’s black
nationalist ideas, and Molefi Kente Asante’s Afrocentrism. The chapter ends
with a discussion of the esoteric notion on the magical qualities of the pig-
ment melanin, based on the ideas of Frances Cress Welsing. A running theme,
all the way from Prince Hall to the present day, is the role of Egypt. Gregorius
shows how “ancient Egypt” has been a hotbed of racialist polemics, with
African American esotericists providing a counterpoint to the common pres-
entations of Egypt as a “white culture”. Egypt is presented as having continuity
with the rest of “black Africa”, and as being the source from which all sub-
sequent “higher wisdom” has been stolen. At times, Afrocentric discussions
enter similar problematic fields as white supremacist ones. This is particularly
evident in Welsing’s melanin theories, where the pigment not only provides
superhuman powers, but also presents people of African heritage as “the mas-
ter race” – infinitely superior not only to Caucasians, but all other “coloured
races” as well.
    As a point of comparison it is interesting to bring up the early constructions
of neopaganism in Germany. Very similar racialist themes were present in the
Ariosophic milieu of the early twentieth century (e.g. in the Thule society and
the Guido von List-founded Hoher Armanen-Orden).16 Racialist issues have
remained a topic of heated debate in heathen milieus even to the present day.17
    If the creation of Afrocentric tradition is marked by seriousness, Anton
Szandor LaVey’s creation of Satanist tradition contains a much more playful
element. In “Secret Lineages and de Facto Satanists”, Per Faxneld notes the
importance of fiction in the Church of Satan’s construction of tradition. We
also find a dual, and seemingly conflicting, approach to “Satanic lineage”. On
the one hand, LaVey promotes the newness of his organization and philosophy,
essentially claiming it to be the first of its sort, and thus the start of Satanism
proper. On the other hand, he also projects a lineage of de facto Satanists back

 16. Gardell, Gods of the Blood, 25–6.
 17. Ibid. For a discussion on the debate on racialism in contemporary heathenism, see also
     Asprem, “Heathens up North”; Granholm, “Esoteric Currents as Discursive Complexes”.


8
                                                                               introduction



in history, with the Decadent poets of the late nineteenth century as good
examples, and claims a continuity of ideology, philosophy and overall ethos.
This apparent conflict is solved in LaVey’s openly pragmatic approach to trad­
ition: “you can choose your fiction to live by”.18 While LaVey’s honesty in this
regard is interesting, it would appear that many of his followers have needed a
more “traditional” understanding of tradition. The case is that many later self-
avowed Satanists have taken LaVey’s claims as fact, either intentionally disre-
garding or simply being unable to grasp the “Black Pope’s” sense of irony and
sarcasm. This is also true of contemporary competitors in the Satanic milieu,
who criticize LaVey’s fictional historiography while failing to acknowledge the
author’s disclaimers in this regard. We also find actors in the milieu who claim
to represent “traditional Satanism”, which, in an ironic turn of events, is actu-
ally a more recent development that LaVey’s “modern Satanism”. In any case,
the pragmatic approach to tradition pioneered by LaVey has also become a
mainstay for many in the milieu.
    While not having the same type of trickster-like quality as Satanism, the
dual appeal of innovation and tradition is arguably even more pronounced in
Chaos Magick. In “Perennialism and Iconoclasm” (Chapter 5), Colin Duggan
provides both a general historical overview of this relatively unexplored
development of occultism, and a detailed discussion of the complex inter-
play between two seemingly contradicting strategies of legitimacy: on the one
hand, Chaos Magicians make use of a fairly standard (at least as far as esoteri-
cism goes) perennialist notion of claiming an “age-old tradition”, and on the
other we find a more complex idea of progress within an “age-old tradition”,
with new developments superseding older ones. Thus, Chaos Magick can be
presented by its practitioners both as being in line with an ancient tradition –
with the universalized shaman often functioning as the exemplar – and as an
essentially innovative current which still exists in a lineage of ancient truth.
The combination of these legitimizing strategies places Chaos Magicians in a
position where they can draw on the work of earlier occultists, but at the same
time also criticize them for being stagnant, outdated and conservative.
    Another interesting feature of Chaos Magick, and one which marks it
out as an odd bird in the otherwise often conservative realm of ceremonial
magic, is its openness to popular culture as a source of inspiration and an
arena for magical practice. Perhaps the most obvious example of the latter is
the Scottish comic book writer Grant Morrison. A practitioner of magic, hav-
ing developed his own particular approach termed “Pop Magic!”,19 Morrison
has described his series The Invisibles as a “hypersigil”.20 That is, a grand-scale


 18. LaVey, quoted in Barton, The Church of Satan, 96.
 19. Morrison, “Pop Magic!”. The exclamation mark is part of the name of the “school of magic”
     itself, with Morrison on his personal webpage (www.grantmorrison.com) spelling it “Pop
     Mag!c”.
 20. Ibid., 21.


                                                                                            9
egil asprem and kennet granholm



magical ­working that has the goal of transforming both the world and the
magician. Thus, Chaos Magick already points towards the relevance of popu-
lar culture and new media for contemporary esotericism, which is the focus of
the next part.


Popular culture and new media

The second part of the volume deals with how esoteric discourses and notions
are created, shaped and propagated through late modern communication
technologies and new media, and how they are transformed by new chan-
nels of mediation. The chapters deal with relations such as ­esotericism in new
media (cyberspace), esotericists’ use of such media, and the new conditions for
interaction, innovation and practice that new forms of communication and
cultural consumption (i.e. popular culture) entail.
   Popular culture plays a pivotal role in religious and cultural change today.
However, the ways in which the term “popular culture” is understood vary.
The approach favoured by many scholars of religion and popular culture in the
last five to ten years puts the focus on the lived, everyday experiences of ordi-
nary people.21 Popular culture is seen as “the shared environment, practices,
and resources of everyday life in a given society”.22 The approach also has the
advantage of not regarding religion and popular culture, or religion and culture
for that matter, as distinct and separate phenomena. One of the major contri-
butions of the study of religion and popular culture is that it provides perspec-
tives on how religiosity can function outside traditional institutional settings.
This also highlights problems in earlier studies of the esoteric, particularly the
focus on “serious” practitioners and the apparent distinction between “real”
and “simulacrum” esotericism. Approaches focusing on the intellectual dimen-
sion, on an “esoteric form of thought”, automatically seem to posit the neces-
sity of “serious conviction” and intentional agency. An example of this seems
present in Henrik Bogdan’s idea of the “[m]igration of esoteric ideas into non-
esoteric materials”, where the presence of “symbols, ideas, or techniques that
traditionally are connected to a certain esoteric tradition” in fantasy litera-
ture, for example, is not really esoteric, as the “esoteric form of thought is not
present”.23 Even more explicitly, Antoine Faivre has created a typology of the
degrees and extents to which a certain fictional work and its reception should
be regarded as “esoteric”, based on the intentions of the author and the reader


 21. E.g. Gordon Lynch, Understanding Theology and Popular Culture; Gordon Lynch,
     “The Role of Popular Music in the Construction of Alternative Spiritual Identities and
     Ideologies”; Lynn Schofield Clark, From Angels to Aliens; Lynn Schofield Clark, “Religion,
     Twice Removed”.
 22. Gordon Lynch, Understanding Theology and Popular Culture, 14.
 23. Bogdan, Western Esotericism and Rituals of Initiation, 20.


10
                                                                              introduction