As mentioned earlier, Carroll and Sherwin drew on both of the legitimiz-
ing strategies discussed by appealing to a long-established tradition of magic
and by claiming to be the next instance in a natural progression of this tradi-
tion. These strong claims serve as an appeal for legitimacy to a wide audience,
namely the occultural milieu. Carroll’s first book, Liber Null, is one of the most
widely read and recommended texts on Chaos Magick. In the introduction,
Carroll states that “The Illuminates of Thanateros are the magical heirs to the
Zos Kia Cultus and the A∴A∴.”43 Sherwin confirms this claim of affiliation
with early twentieth-century occultism in general, and with Austin Osman
Spare in particular. He states that Spare was “emphatic about the workability
of sigils” and that his own (Sherwin’s) “experiments over the last fifteen years
confirm his confidence in the technique as do the experiments I have per-
suaded other people to do”.44 This claim fits with the second type of strategy.
The affiliation with both Austin Osman Spare and Aleister Crowley serves to
place Chaos Magick as the next instance of the magical tradition in a natural
progression. It appeals to the wide occultural audience with an interest in early
twentieth-century occultism as it seeks to be the magical movement of the
late twentieth century. Carroll also provides a diagram, a kind of flowchart, on
the page following the introduction. It is called “The survival of the magical
tradition” and it includes shamanism as the origin and precursor of the beliefs
and practices of a whole host of other people, groups and movements. The
idea of the shaman as the origin of magic or as the first magician is prominent
throughout many Chaos Magick texts. Carroll’s Psychonaut describes it as
“our oldest magical and mystical tradition. It is from shamanism that all reli-
gious arts and magical sciences originate”.45 Sherwin also refers to the activi-
ties of the shaman in The Book of Results and The Theatre of Magick. In the
former, Sherwin claims that

      It is absurd that sophisticated magicians spend so much of their
      energy in keeping out impressions from the chaos or weird side of
      consciousness when shamans the world over go to extreme lengths
      to open themselves up to those impressions and energies.46

 43. Carroll, Liber Null and Psychonaut, 7. The Zos Kia Cultus is a magical order occult-
     ist Kenneth Grant claimed to have founded with Austin Osman Spare. Some of Grant’s
     reports about Spare have been found to be less than accurate. The reference to the Zos
     Kia Cultus is undoubtedly a reference to Spare. The A∴A∴ is the magical order Crowley
     founded in 1909. Grant played an important part in the popularization of Crowley and
     Spare.
 44. Sherwin, The Book of Results, 31. A sigil is a glyph used in magical ritual. At its simplest,
     it is created by rearranging the letters in a given phrase to form a pictogram or subjective
     symbol.
 45. Carroll, Liber Null and Psychonaut, 169.
 46. Sherwin, The Book of Results, 24.

                                                                                             103
colin duggan



Here again, the constructed transcultural shaman is held up to have always
been involved in practices concerned with chaos, and shamanism is held
to share some core principle with Chaos Magick. It is no surprise then that
the diagram in Liber Null includes Tantra, Taoism, Sufism, Gnosticism, the
Knights Templar, Hermeticism and alchemy, medieval goetia, Rosicrucianism,
Freemasonry, John Dee, the Bavarian Illuminati, Ordo Temple Orientis,
the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Aleister Crowley, Austin Osman
Spare and the Zos Kia Cultus, witchcraft and sorcery, and finally ends in
the Illuminates of Thanateros (IOT). This is the kind of list that scholars of
Western esotericism will be familiar with as it includes much of the subject
matter that constitutes the field. Not only that, it is a perfect example of the
kind of perennialism prevalent in the late twentieth century. Overall, it is a
syncretistic yet selective rendering of a constructed history of magic and fits
well with the first strategy outlined above. This appeal to age-old tradition
claims an ancient origin for, and the continuous transmission of, the core ideas
of magic that are, by the end of the diagram, preserved in the IOT. Carroll
goes on to state that:

      The secrets of magic are universal and of such a practical physical
      nature as to defy simple explanation. Those beings who realize and
      practice such secrets are said to have achieved mastership. Masters
      will, at various points in history, inspire adepts to create magic,
      mystic, religious, or even secular orders to bring others to master-
      ship. Such orders have at certain times openly called themselves
      the Illuminati; at other times secrecy has seemed more prudent.
      The mysteries can only be preserved by constant revelation. In this,
      the I.O.T. continues a tradition perhaps seven thousand years old,
      yet the Order in the outer has no history, although it is constituted
      as a satrap of the Illuminati.47

This affirmation of the IOT as the Illuminati of the late twentieth century while
attesting to a tradition that is “perhaps seven thousand years old” reiterates the
employment of both strategies discussed in this chapter. As an establishing act
and an appeal to the community of esotericists, a strong and encompassing
appeal to tradition is offered.
   Before moving on to the discussion of Wilde and Biroco, some of the work
by Phil Hine will be discussed. His work was published later than Carroll and
Sherwin’s, but he is supportive of their position of an ambivalent appeal to
tradition as I have outlined it here. That is to say, he employs both strategies
of legitimization and seeks to add to the work of his predecessors by develop-
ing and strengthening this double appeal. His three-volume work Techniques


 47. Carroll, Liber Null and Psychonaut, 9.


104
                                                            perennialism and iconoclasm



of Modern Shamanism is a strong reiteration of the importance of the shaman
in Chaos Magick. In the first volume, Walking Between the Worlds, he echoes
Carroll’s claim that the shaman is the original magician: “The Shaman is one
of the most ancient and one of the most enduring figures in human evolution.
Shamanism is the source of both Magic and Religion, and as Mircea Eliade put
it, is ‘an archaic technique of ecstasy’.”48 The reference to Eliade’s 1951 work
(trans. 1964), Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy, perhaps reveals the
source of the notion of a transcultural shaman, referred to in this and many
other of the Chaos Magick texts. This provides a good example of the difficul-
ties that arise when scholarship begins to shape the discourse on religion or
magic.49 Though Eliade is still an important figure in religious studies, the diffi-
culty in ascribing religious or non-religious positions to him compounds these
difficulties. As Bryan Rennie states: “Despite the fact that he did not prac-
tice any religious tradition and despite the complexity of argument needed
to describe him as religious, Eliade was often apprehended as profoundly
religious.”50 This also makes his work very appealing to anyone involved in reli-
gious innovation in the late twentieth century. Hine goes on to state that:

      Its [shamanism’s] structural elements can be traced well back into
      the Upper Palaeolithic era, and these elements are essentially simi-
      lar throughout many different cultures, in different frames of time.
      Even though the surface details of the shamanic world-view tends
      to differ even within particular cultures, the underlying princi-
      ples remain similar, supplying some elemental requirement of the
      human psyche which has remained constant over a period of hun-
      dreds of thousands of years.51

Here we see the confirmation of the idea of the shaman as an age-old trans­
cultural entity, but, taken together, these quotes introduce the language of
scholarship. With references to Eliade and the “Upper Palaeolithic era”, there
is an effort here to gain legitimacy through an appeal to academia. Of course,
Chaos Magick appeals to science in many ways but these are beyond the scope
of this paper. Hine’s use of scholarly and scientific language aids him in his
description of the history of magical models:

      Until fairly recently (in a broad historical sense), practitioners of
      magick subscribed to the “Spirit” Model of Magick, which ­basically


 48. Hine, Techniques of Modern Shamanism, vol. 1, 5.
 49. For the role played by academics in shaping discourses on shamanism, see Znamenski,
     The Beauty of the Primitive. For an example of how similar processes affect discourses on
     Tantra, see Urban, Tantra. See also Chapter 2 of this volume.
 50. Rennie, “Eliade”, 576.
 51. Hine, Techniques of Modern Shamanism, vol. 1, 5.


                                                                                         105
colin duggan



      states that the Otherworlds are real, and inhabited by various
      pantheons of discrete entities – elementals, demons, angels, god-
      desses, gods, etc.52

This “Spirit” model corresponds generally to the scholarly descriptions of pre-
Enlightenment magic where the existence of discarnate intelligences informs
theory and practice. Hine continues to demonstrate a systematic view of the
history of magical models. The next model outlined is the “Energy” model: