You all know what mercury looks like – at room temperature it’s
     a silvery liquid that flows, it’s like a mirror. For the alchemists,
     and this is just a very short exercise in alchemical thinking, for
     the alchemists mercury was mind itself, in a sense, and by tra­cing
     through the steps by which they reached that conclusion you can
     have a taste of what alchemical thinking was about. Mercury takes
     the form of its container. If I pour mercury into a cup, it takes the
     shape of the cup, if I pour it into a test tube, it takes the shape
     of the test tube. This taking the shape of its container is a qual-
     ity of mind and yet here it is present in a flowing, silvery metal.
     The other thing is, mercury is a reflecting surface. You never see
     mercury, what you see is the world which surrounds it, which is
     perfectly reflected in its surface like a moving mirror, you see. And
     then if you’ve ever – as a child, I mean, I have no idea how toxic
     this process is, but I spent a lot of time as a child hounding my
     grandfather for his hearing aid batteries which I would then smash
     with a hammer and get the mercury out and collect it in little bot-
     tles and carry it around with me. Well, the wonderful thing about
     mercury is when you pour it out on a surface and it beads up, then
     each bead of mercury becomes a little microcosm of the world.
     And yet the mercury flows back together into a unity. Well, as a
     child I had not yet imbibed the assumptions and the ontology of
     science. I was functioning as an alchemist. For me, mercury was
     this fascinating magical substance onto which I could project the
     contents of my mind. And a child playing with mercury is an alche-
     mist hard at work, no doubt about it.40

In this passage it is easy to recognize a whole range of basic esoteric assump-
tions central to McKenna’s thinking: the interconnectedness of mind and mat-
ter, the notion of microcosmos/macrocosmos, the idea of individual minds
being ultimately part of a universal Mind, and the idea of the human mind as
the “mirror of nature” (and the reverse). Interestingly, he pointed out that as


40. McKenna, “Lectures on Alchemy”, lecture 1.


                                                                             405
wouter j . hanegraaff



far as he was concerned, the occultist currents since the nineteenth century
were of little interest, since they had already been infected by modernizing
and secularizing trends. McKenna was pointing towards pre-Enlightenment
hermeticism – flourishing, as he emphasized, first in late antiquity and then in
the Renaissance, both periods of “crisis” similar to our own – for models of a
“magical” and enchanted revival that was still in touch with the symbolic and
mythopoeic thinking in analogies and correspondences proper to “archaic”
cultures. As I have explained elsewhere, it was precisely from such a perspec-
tive that the counterculture had been reading Frances Yates’s narrative of “the
Hermetic Tradition”.41 Authors like McKenna perceived it as a tradition domi-
nated by magic, personal religious experience, and the powers of the imagina-
tion; it promoted a world-affirming mysticism consonant with an “enchanted”
and holistic science that looked at nature as a living, organic whole, perme-
ated by invisible forces and energies; and it reflected a confident, optimistic,
forward-looking perspective that emphasized humanity’s potential to operate
on the world and create a better, more harmonious, more beautiful society. To
all this, McKenna added a direct avenue towards the attainment of gnosis: the
use of entheogenic substances.
    Few participants in the contemporary subculture of entheogenic neo­
shamanism are as well read in alchemical and hermetic literature as McKenna
was, but they do share his basic worldview. Elsewhere I have argued that the
various currents and ideas that may be constructed as “esotericism” have ulti-
mately emerged from the encounter in Western culture between biblical mon-
otheism and hellenistic paganism.42 First, they share a rejection of the doctrine
of creatio ex nihilo, emphasizing instead that the world is co-eternal with God.
This basic principle may lead to an extreme “gnostic” dualism or to radical
pantheism, but most commonly it has taken the shape of a “­cosmotheism”
in which the divine is present in the visible world of creation without being
identical with it. From this first principle there emerged a second one: the
belief that as human beings, we are able to attain direct experiential knowl-
edge of our own divine nature. We are not dependent on God revealing him-
self to us (as in classic monotheism, where the creature is dependent on the
Creator’s initiative), nor is our capacity for knowledge limited to the bodily
senses and natural reason (as in science and rational philosophy), but the
very nature of our souls allows us direct access to the supreme, eternal sub-
stance of Being. Such direct experiential knowledge, or gnosis, is believed to
be attained through “ecstatic” states of mind. Seen from this perspective, con-
temporary neoshamanism as represented by a central author like McKenna is,
indeed, a typical form of entheogenic esotericism in the narrow sense of the
word. McKenna’s “archaic revival” means a revival of cosmotheism against the


 41. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 4 (section on Frances Yates).
 42. Ibid., conclusion.


406
                                                             entheogenic esotericism



­ orldviews of classic monotheism and rationalist science; and he highlights
w
entheogenic substances as providing a direct doorway to gnosis.
   McKenna died of brain cancer in 2000, but remains alive on the Internet.
His most prominent successor in recent years is another American, Daniel
Pinchbeck, who has inherited a somewhat similar “neoshamanic” worldview,
including a millenarian focus on 2012.43 They represent two different gen-
erations, but have much in common. McKenna often contrasted his mature
worldview against the “intellectual despair” of post-war existentialism that
was dominant during his childhood:

      I grew up reading those people and it made my adolescence much
      harder than it needed to be. I mean, my god, there wasn’t an iota of
      hope to be found anywhere. That’s why, for me, psychedelics broke
      over that intellectual world like a tidal wave of revelation. I quoted
      to you last night Jean Paul Sartre’s statement that nature is mute.
      Now I see this as an obscenity almost, an intellectual crime against
      reason and intuition. It’s the absolute antithesis of the logos.44

Pinchbeck, for his part, actually converted from existentialist despair to enthe-
ogenic esotericism. The typical case of a “jaded Manhattan journalist”, he had
fallen into a deep spiritual crisis: “Wandering the streets of the East Village,
I spent so much time contemplating the meaninglessness of existence that I
sometimes felt like a ghost. Perhaps I am already dead, I thought to myself.”45
He experimented with psychedelics, but without much result, until he made
the radical step of travelling to the African country Gabon to participate in
a ritual with the Bwiti people, who used a famous psychoactive substance
known as Iboga. This was the beginning of what he describes, in his Breaking
Open the Head (2002), as an initiation into shamanism that cured him of exis-
tential ennui and despair.
    Pinchbeck now stands at the centre of a new movement that has been
referred to by various terms, including “cyber-spirituality”, “techno-­shamanism”,
or “new edge”. As explained by Dorien Zandbergen in a recent analysis:

      The rise and popularization of digital technologies such as Virtual
      Reality and the Internet in [the 1990s] was accompanied by the
      hopeful expectation of spiritual seekers that these would make
      permanently available the utopian worlds and the altered states
      of consciousness sought after by a previous generation of hip-
      pies. … Because of the supposed inherent disembodied nature of

 43. Pinchbeck, Breaking Open the Head; Pinchbeck, 2012; Pinchbeck, Notes from the Edge
     Times (based on columns for his website www.realitysandwich.com).
 44. McKenna, “Lectures on Alchemy”, lecture 2, part 2.
 45. Pinchbeck, Breaking Open the Head, 14.


                                                                                  407
wouter j . hanegraaff



      cyberspace, some scholars argued in the 1990s that cyberspace
      has become the “Platonic new home for the mind and the heart”, a
      “new Jerusalem”, or a “paradise”.46