The chapter is, appropriately, called “The Epistle to the Paranoid”, and the
“advert” is a play on the style and content of similar advertisements for con-
spiracy literature. The mythological founding in the advert, pushing the foun-
dation of the Illuminati back almost 700 years to Hassan i Sabbah, is quickly
transcended on the following pages when we are thrown further back – to
Atlantis and beyond.53
   In the tradition of both esoteric societies’ emic historiographies and con-
spiracy theories, the historical genealogy of the true Illuminati is unmasked
as a chain through more of known (and unknown) history than most suspect.
The “knowledge” presented is, however, as part of “nonsense as salvation”54
partly contradicted, partly transcended by giving conflicting information. This
strategy becomes even more central to Discordianism through the publica-
tion of Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson’s Illuminatus! trilogy.55 There
we find the Illuminati to be all of, and anything but, what is ­generally assumed

 51.   Cusack, Invented Religions, 27.
 52.   Hill & Thornley, Principia Discordia, 70.
 53.   Ibid., 72.
 54.   Ibid., 74.
 55.   Shea & Wilson, The Illuminatus! Trilogy.

210
                                                     hidden knowledge , hidden powers



by historians, esoteric societies, and ­conspiracy theorists alike. The Illuminati
seems the authoritarian, secret cabal behind the New World Order (NWO),
but in reality “employs a totally different, laissez-faire (and Taoist) agenda”.56 In
style with superconspiracies in general, Illuminatus! has the antagonists play
both sides of an issue, infiltrating each other and making chaos. Of course, the
Illuminati are made to have played their role in secret assassinations and plots
that have shaped history. This includes “alternative” history, from Atlantis for-
ward, but always with a twist, following a narrative style that consciously diso-
rients the reader by frequently switching points of view, time, narrators, and
what is presented as truthful.
    The chaos is there to enlighten the reader. By creating confusion, cast-
ing doubt and uncertainty on everything, the reader is treated to a narrative
“mindfuck” – a strategy for disrupting an established sense of reality related
to “esoterrorism”57 – forcing the reader to question what is real. This may
allow the reader to glance the fnords, the hidden, fear-inducing words, top-
ics, objects and so on that the authors tell us we are programmed to ignore.
Through the right “initiation” we may, like the character George Dorn, become
able to notice them:

      Then I saw the fnords.
         The feature story involved another of the endless squabbles
      between Russia and the U.S. in the UN General Assembly, and after
      each direct quote from the Russian delegate I read a quite distinct
      “Fnord!” The second lead was about a debate in Congress on getting
      the troops out of Costa Rica; every argument presented by Senator
      Bacon was followed by another “Fnord!” At the bottom of the page
      was a Times depth-type study of the growing pollution problem
      and the increasing use of gas masks among New Yorkers; the most
      distressing chemical facts were interpolated with more “Fnords.”
         Suddenly I saw Hagbard’s eyes burning into me and heard his
      voice: “Your heart will remain calm. Your adrenalin gland will
      remain calm. Calm, all-over calm. You will not panic. You will look
      at the fnord and see it. You will not evade it or black it out. You will
      stay calm and face it.” And further back, way back: my first-grade
      teacher writing FNORD on the blackboard, while a wheel with a
      spiral design turned and turned on his desk, turned and turned,
      and his voice droned on,
         IF YOU DON’T SEE THE FNORD IT CAN’T EAT YOU,
      DON’T SEE THE FNORD, DON’T SEE THE FNORD …
         I looked back at the paper and still saw the fnords.58


 56. LiBrizzi, “The Illuminatus! Trilogy”, 340.
 57. See Chapter 6 of this volume.
 58. Shea & Wilson, The Illuminatus! Trilogy, 438.

                                                                                 211
asbjørn dyrendal



Fnords are programmed to spread a low-grade fear making people eager to
believe, and easy to control and manipulate. Fnords continue and develop the
popular literary and political conspiracy theme of “brainwashing”59 related
to foreign power, government, and consumer society alike. Stealing people’s
autonomy with fear, the only avenue left for release is consumerism:

        Then I got a hunch, and turned quickly to the advertisements. It
        was as I expected: no fnords. That was part of the gimmick, too:
        only in consumption, endless consumption, could they escape the
        amorphous threat of the invisible fnords.60

Fnords hinder agency and promote mindless consumerism. But that is
just a small countercultural element to the use of conspiracy theory in
Discordianism. To some it may be important, but the confusing and complex
plots, the humour and the mock academic elements are perhaps the more
existentially essential element of how conspiracy theory is used: Through
Discordian use, and particularly in the Illuminatus! trilogy, conspiracy theory
functions as a deliberate “mind virus” to disrupt the reader’s ordinary cogni-
tive system. It becomes, in keeping with founder Kerry Thornley’s vision of
Discordianism as “an American form of Zen Buddhism”,61 a kind of absurd
koan, taking rationality to extremes of paradox where every claim to knowl-
edge collapses in on itself. In this way conspiracy theories become a form of
“guerrilla enlightenment”-tactic, generating doubt to promote the laughter of
sudden, sublime insight.62


CONSPIRACY CULTURE: DAVID ICKE AND JIM MARRS

The examples above show how some esoteric spokespersons have used con-
spiracy theory with regard to history, agency and knowledge. It works partly
as a mythology of evil, making sense of history by revealing secrets about how
the world works. The claims to knowledge have different ­qualities, from cer-
tain truth to complete doubt. Knowledge about the hidden conspiracy plays,
in limited parallel to esoteric “gnosis”, different roles in “salvation”, but it is
always a guide to action: from understanding the deeper issues and agents of
our time, through purely personal protection, to deliberate chaos and the col-
lapse of ontology as a way to enlightenment.
   In the next section we shall have a look at some of the same issues with
spokespersons for the most explicit part of conspiracy culture: conspiracy

 59.   E.g. Seed, Brainwashing.
 60.   Shea & Wilson, The Illuminatus! Trilogy, 439.
 61.   Cf. discussion in Cusack, Invented Religions.
 62.   Ibid.; cf. LiBrizzi, “The Illuminatus! Trilogy”.


212
                                                hidden knowledge , hidden powers



t­ heorists making their living as such. As with the examples above, I have cho-
 sen from both the explicitly spiritual and the more secular side. While Jim
 Marrs starts from a basis of “event conspiracies” (the assassination of John F.
 Kennedy) and holds a more or less consistent secular basis for his thinking
 throughout his texts, David Icke is explicitly “spiritual” and anti-materialist in
 his mode of argument. There are reasons to consider both. The spiritual con-
 spiracy theorists are numerous and we should not underplay the explicit con-
 nection. Considering the “secular” conspiracy theorists helps make sure that
 we are not merely comparing the same kind of apples.


David Icke and Babylonian reptiles from the fourth dimension

David Icke is one of the brightest stars on the occultural conspiracy scene, but
controversial among some circles of conspiracy theorists, partly for his expli­
citly spiritual side, and partly for anchoring his conspiracy in shapeshifting
reptiles. Sharing the general occultural critique of Christianity and organized
religions, and framing the critique as a history of hidden plots, Icke favours an
ontology with hidden “dimensions”, levels of existence, materiality and spir-
itual existence beyond bodily death. Indeed, all of these general “New Age”
topics are vital to his mode of argument when revealing the truth behind the
“Babylonian Brotherhood”.
   Icke’s books are crammed with alternative history, including alternative his-
tories about religion. They serve as narrative critiques of politics and religion,
grounding the criticism in a genealogy of the powerful: the secret societies,
practices and ideas he criticizes are all attributed to a hybrid reptile–human
bloodline from, among other places, “the lower fourth dimension”.63 These
alien reptiles created religions like Christianity and Islam as tools for their
own “Babylonian Brotherhood”:

       Judaism, Christianity and Islam all base their beliefs on these same
       stories written by the Levites after their stay in Babylon. We are
       looking at a point in history which was to define and control the
       world from then until now. … The Cabala is the esoteric stream of
       what is called Judaism, which is in fact a front for the Babylonian
       Brotherhood, as is the Vatican.64

This exemplifies a typical epistemological strategy: listing names combined
with brief narratives of their hidden connections and their meaning, so that
initiates may awaken to knowledge and be free. Here, esoteric societies and


 63. E.g. Icke, The Biggest Secret, 26.
 64. Ibid., 84.


                                                                               213
asbjørn dyrendal