­ ystically enlightened human. But all of the apokalypses considered above
m
have a redemptive quality. Whether meant for the ­individual alone or for a
larger collective, they serve to make sense and prepare for recovering agency
from oppressive circumstances.
   The relation between knowledge and agency is, then, in many ways the
most important one as it holds the key to salvation. In order to break free
one must be made aware of how one’s agency is being subverted. This is, to
paraphrase Partridge, occulture at its most ordinary: the attempts to subvert
“brainwashing” by “mindfucks” or “esoterrorism” may be foregrounded by the
esoteric avant-garde, but the fear of threats to agency through mainstream
consumer culture is itself mainstream. It is a topic which brings into contact
esoteric, conspiratorial, and mainstream discourses, and is mediated and writ-
ten large through popular culture:110 from mainstream thrillers to conspiracy
lore, government and big business is portrayed as controlling the individual
through powers both seen and unseen.
   Still, the fear of agency loss grows when we move from the broader milieu
to central spokespersons and their theories. This is when we may talk of
agency panic:

      [I]ntense anxiety about an apparent loss of autonomy or self-­
      control – the conviction that one’s actions are being controlled
      by someone else, that one has been “constructed” by powerful
      external agents. … This fear sometimes manifests itself in a belief
      that the world is full of “programmed” or “brainwashed” subjects,
      addicts or “mass-produced” persons.111

With the exception of Steiner’s more specific fears of materialism vaccinating
(“brainwashing”) people against spiritual ideas, we have seen that the mass
production of programmed subjects was a repeated concern of how conspir-
acy limits agency and commits evil. Indeed, in some of the theories, this, not
the actions of murder and mayhem, is the epitome of the conspiracy’s evil.
This is one reason why knowledge is given soteriological status: it has the
power to “break the programming”. This also shows the value given to free
agency and a free self. In line with modern assumptions generally, and self-
spirituality specifically, the self as agent is functionally sacred. It is the last ref-
uge of what should be protected from the onslaught of modernity and outside
power, but which the lore of conspiracy culture tells us is under attack.
   The underlying ideals and/or assumptions about agency and personhood
tend towards idealization of a “diamantine” self with a core separated in
essence from persuasion and influence. In mainstream culture the ideal tends


110. E.g. Melley, “Agency Panic”; Seed, Brainwashing.
111. Ibid., 62.


                                                                                    223
asbjørn dyrendal



towards “a rational, motivated agent with a protected interior core of beliefs,
desires, and memories”.112 Notwithstanding its general lack of plausibility,
this is a popular, normative idea of selfhood, generating a flood of recipes for
how to become that diamantine, effective self. Popular esotericism – from
The Secret and other positive thinking manuals to more complex introduc-
tions to magic(k) – thrives on this, but goes one level further: the diamantine
self is a higher self, above the purely rational and interior. It tends to be both
“supra-rational” and transpersonal, requiring “initiatory” knowledge in order
to become self-aware. If we view the positive focus on strategies of “agency
recovery” as the esoteric mainstream response to agency threats – an occul-
tural positive psychology telling the prospective adherent that one may achieve
“change according to Will” by personal change and use of specific techniques
– the conspiracy response in dark occulture seems again an inverted image.
It affirms personal agency, but, as brought to the fore by LaVey, through a dif-
ferent lens: The good news is that there exists effective, personal agency in
the world, and that it uses recognizable techniques. The bad news is that the
techniques are in use by evil forces so steeped in secrecy that they are almost
impossible to reach. Exposing the conspiracy thus serves as key to “agency
recovery” when conspiracy is brought into the picture. In both “light” and
“dark” occulture, exposing hidden sources of power and agency leads to the
recovery of agency.
    Looking at conspiracy theory in esoteric discourse together with conspiracy
theory as esoteric discourse primarily highlights similarities. It helps us notice
the parallel ways in which knowledge, history and agency are constructed,
their similar functions, and the internal connections between esoteric dis-
course and conspiracy discourse. Connecting anything with something else
through hidden links, where everything is connected and identity is conferred
on principles of “signatures”, occult correspondences, and “as here, so there”,
conspiracy theory may take on the look of a modern esoteric discourse, pre­
occupied, perhaps, with social salvation rather than the divine. With the sacra-
lization of the self, agency takes a central seat, and with secularization, hidden
histories and “sciency” references take the place of more traditional mythi-
cal ones. Both esoteric discourse and conspiracy theories belong to occulture,
and they seem to draw from the same doxa. Thus historiographies, topics, and
concerns move between them, adding the dualistic, polemical edge to their
response to a marginalizing mainstream. Conspiracy theory works to present
hidden knowledge about evil, but it also cements an audience as “in-group”
and attempts “transformation” of the passive individual to social mobilization
through presenting the negative, where lighter occulture focuses on the pos-
itive. Conspiracy theory may thus be a natural, sociological side of esoteric


112. Melley, Empire of Conspiracy, 14.



224
                                               hidden knowledge , hidden powers



­ iscourse, as well as a logical extension of it in constructing an “Other” that
d
does not recognize esoteric discourse and attendant movements as legitimate.


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

This article has developed partly out of discussions with Egil Asprem, who has
contributed numerous valuable ideas at different stages. The article would not
have been possible without his contribution.




                                                                            225
chapter 11

DISCURSIVE TRANSFERS AND
RECONFIGURATIONS
TRACING THE RELIGIOUS AND THE ESOTERIC
IN SECULAR CULTURE

Kocku von Stuckrad


What is the place of esotericism in modern culture? The guiding question of
this volume presents us with more than one theoretical problem. We have to
answer subsets of questions, such as:

   • What is esotericism?
   • What is the West?
   • What is modernity?

All three questions would merit a book-length discussion. In fact, the debate
about what characterizes Western modernity – or, rather, modernities1 – has
become one of the major controversies in the social sciences and in the aca-
demic study of religion. The study of “Western esotericism” has only insuffi-
ciently taken notice of this debate.
   In what follows I present the outline of an interpretational model that
intends to add to our understanding of the place and function of religion and
esotericism in the contemporary Western world. Put more precisely: I am
proposing a model that locates the religious and the esoteric in contemporary
European and North American fields of discourse. In doing so, I proceed from
theoretical considerations that I have elaborated in earlier contributions.2 My
theoretical framework operates with the dynamic of a twofold pluralism that
characterizes European history of religion – a pluralism of religious options


   1. On the concept of multiple modernities see Eisenstadt, Comparative Civilizations and
      Multiple Modernities; Eisenstadt, Multiple Modernities. In my view, one should go a step
      further and identify multiple modernities not only in intercultural comparison but also
      within European culture itself.
   2. For an earlier view on esotericism, see von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”. Cf. this to von
      Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge.


226
                                               discursive transfers and reconfigurations



and a pluralism of societal systems and domains that interact with religious
systems in manifold ways.3 Within these pluralisms, discourses of perfect
knowledge can be addressed as “esoteric discourse”. The notion of esoteric dis-
course helps us to reconstruct the genealogies of modern identities in a plural-
istic competition of knowledge.4
    Building forth on this historical analysis, I am interested here in the dis-
cursive changes that have taken place since the rise of secularism. After a
brief discussion of what is known as the secularization theory, I will present
four perspectives on the reconfiguration of the religious fields of discourse
that have also redefined the location of the esoteric in modern culture. In the
final part of my contribution I will apply these analytical instruments to a case
study, taken from contemporary science.


AFTER SECULARIZATION