88. Stargate Wiki, “Ascension”.
 89. Ibid.
 90. It should be noted that this list of abilities is almost a straight description of Siddhis (super-
     natural powers) in Tantra. In Stargate, ascended beings are also speculated to have pro-
     vided the inspiration for Buddhism on Earth. By discussing ascension in Stargate in the
     context of the esoteric I am not disregarding this obvious Tantric/Buddhist influence, but
     simply shifting the focus of the analysis to the role accorded to “knowledge”.
 91. Stargate SG-1, “Abyss”.
 92. Stargate SG-1, “Full Circle”.


326
                  the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



common esoteric initiatory theme of “dying while still alive”, Daniel Jackson
needs to die in order to ascend.93 Similarly, the character Rodney McKey
needs to learn how to “let go”, in essence implying a readiness to die, in order
to ascend.94 Another interesting feature is the inclusion of the standard eso-
teric trope of proper transmission, as an ascended being can “educate” a lower
being in “enlightenment”, not by providing “facts” but by stimulating the being
in question to “evolve” him-/herself.
   So it can be firmly established that the Stargate franchise cultivates an
esoteric discourse. What makes it interesting in terms of the secular and the
post-secular, however, is the explicit introduction of two distinct, but not dia-
metrically opposed, ways of achieving ascension. Beings can achieve ascen-
sion through spiritual or evolutionary means. Spiritual ascension seems to
be effected through meditation and the use of anecdotes reminiscent of Zen
Buddhist koans,95 but also by a higher being teaching a lower one,96 as dis-
cussed above. Evolutionary ascension is reached when a being or a whole spe-
cies advances to the level of “using more than 90% of their brain”, again as
discussed above. However, this evolutionary process need not be natural, as
the series provides examples of beings and species having stimulated their
brain activity by technological means, resequenced their DNA, “ascension
machines” and so on, to the degree where they develop paranormal abilities
and eventually ascension.97 Even in technologically induced ascension, how-
ever, meditation and proper concentration are essential.98 Stargate, and ascen-
sion in it, is a cultural phenomenon that portrays the marriage of technology
and spirituality, in a way which puts neither in a privileged position.
   The movie Avatar (2009) is, for several reasons, another interesting exam-
ple of the intersection between the esoteric and popular culture, and the secu-
lar and post-secular. First, Avatar is the top-grossing movie of all time, with
cinema revenue of nearly $2.8 billion and US DVD sales of nearly $200 mil-
lion by early January 2011,99 and it achieved its number one status in a very
short amount of time. While not dismissing the impact of successful market-
ing, the popularity of the movie still means that it resonates with a consider-
able number of people, and it is thus reasonably safe to claim that it is a good
reflection of concerns people today regard as being important. Second, the
movie itself draws extensively from a number of key esoteric ideas. Combined
with the first point, this strongly suggests that the esoteric has entered the
mainstream, and that esoteric notions resonate with large ­numbers of

 93. Stargate SG-1, “Meridian”.
 94. Stargate Atlantis, “Tao of Rodney”.
 95. Stargate SG-1, “Maternal Instinct”.
 96. Stargate SG-1, “Meridian”.
 97. See Stargate SG-1, “Prototype”; Stargate Atlantis, “Hide and Seek”; Stargate Atlantis, “Tao
     of Rodney”.
 98. Stargate Atlantis, “Tao of Rodney”.
 99. Numbers, “Avatar”.


                                                                                           327
kennet granholm



c­ ontemporary Westerners (and beyond). The esoteric notion most central
 to the movie is the ideas of a living, all-permeating nature, essentially in a
 modernized form as discussed by Hanegraaff.100 All the animal and plant life
on the moon Pandora, which the movie is set on, are connected in a “bio-­
botanical neural network”. The native Na’vi population, an alien humanoid
species, can link with other life forms, and even the moon itself, by connect-
ing a ­tentacle-like appendage to a similar one on the life-form in question. In
connecting with the moon itself the Na’vi can commune with their ancestors,
who have in death become part of the macro life form which consists of all life
on the moon. That this macro life form is real and not just the result of reli-
gious imaginings of the Na’vi is confirmed at the climax of the movie, when
it responds to a plea for help by amassing all animal life in the fight against
the human oppressors who are set on destroying the way of life on Pandora.
Potential secularist influences are demonstrated in the scientific rationale pro-
vided for the composition of Pandora. This confirms that the lifestyle of the
Na’vi is not simply based on primitive superstitions, but is in fact based on
scientifically objective reality. Potential post-secularist influences are demon-
strated in the conflict between the technologically inclined humans and the
holistic worldview of the Na’vi. While a scientific rationale is provided, it is
made clear that science and technology are empty if not tempered by spiritu-
ality. Thus the Na’vi’s victory over the humans is also the victory of a spiritually
informed secularism over a purely capitalist–materialist one.
    Third, and perhaps most interestingly, Avatar has garnered much discus-
sion on spirituality and provided inspiration for esoteric actors. A video posted
by YouTube user “MoonlitOpal” in January 2010 demonstrates the potential of
Avatar to inspire to the esoteric. In discussing the essential interconnected-
ness of all life on Pandora, and her interpretation that this involves “to literally
plug into their goddess”, “MoonlitOpal” comments: “I know that it’s all sci-fi
but isn’t that essentially what Wicca is?”101 She goes on to say that she does
 not normally like science fiction, and that it was the spiritual dimension that
 compelled her. “MoonlitOpal” concludes: “I just connected it automatically to
 Wicca when I saw it”.102


CONCLUSION

What I have tried to do in this chapter is to provide a broad account of sec-
ularization theory and the current discussions on post-secularity, combin-
ing this with some preliminary interpretations of what both might imply for
the esoteric, and finally grounding these interpretations in a few case studies

100. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 407–9.
101. MoonlitOpal, “Avatar Through Pagan Eyes”.
102. Ibid.


328
               the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



derived from science fiction film and television. There are still many issues
to work out. Secularization theory is firmly grounded in “old-school” under-
standings of what religion is and does, and may not be suitable for discussions
relating to much else than European institutional Christianity. Still, adopting a
discursive understanding of processes and theories of secularization as being
informed by secularism, might open up new avenues for investigating trans-
formations of the European religious landscape. When it comes to discussions
of the post-secular, we are dealing both with relatively new scholarly develop-
ments and some unfortunate vagueness in the ­discussions thus far. We are
also dealing with some of the same problems as can be found in seculariza-
tion, such as an at times limited view of what religion can be. Here, as well,
turning to discursive perspectives provide some interesting possibilities, and
requires us to take a closer look at what we as scholars are doing when we are
projecting specific societal scenarios. Something which is not always remem-
bered in discussions of the post-secular, and which cannot be stressed enough,
is that if discussions of the post-secular are to have any theoretical and analyti-
cal weight, they must by necessity be related to discussions of secularization.
Finally, I want to highlight the need for scholars of esotericism, particularly
of course in the investigation of contemporary expressions, to take popular
culture seriously. Popular culture comprises one of the most, if not the most,
significant arenas to explore in the study of religion today in contemporary
society, and the esoteric has steadily increased in influence on this arena. In
order to be able to seriously investigate the esoteric in conjuncture with popu-
lar culture, however, some changes in theory, method and overall perspectives
might be required.




                                                                                329
chapter 16

PSYCHIC ENCHANTMENTS OF
THE EDUCATED CLASSES
THE PARANORMAL AND THE AMBIGUITIES
OF DISENCHANTMENT

Egil Asprem


       Science will not remain mute on spiritual and ethical questions
       for long. Even now, we can see the first stirrings among psycholo-
       gists and neuroscientists of what may one day become a genuinely
       rational approach to these matters – one that will bring even the
       most rarefied mystical experience within the purview of open, sci-
       entific inquiry. It is time we realized that we need not be unreason-
       able to suffuse our lives with love, compassion, ecstasy and awe;
       nor must we renounce all forms of spirituality or mysticism to be
       on good terms with reason.1


ACADEMICS AGAINST THE STREAM?