and transgressing of the borders between the divine and the human realms as
characteristic of esoteric discourses, which rest on totalizing claims of knowl-
edge. Examples would include the large field of magic (including, but not
restricted to magia naturalis),49 Jewish and Christian Kabbalah, or the notion
of natura naturans in F. W. J. Schelling and other philosophers.50 But this only
forms the background of our discussion here. The question we have to answer
is how these fields have been reconfigured in modern knowledge about nature
and whether we can demonstrate transfers between religious, scientific, philo-
sophical, political, and other systems in modern culture.
    The life sciences of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries are excellent
examples of such a process. From a cultural studies point of view, the mod-
ern life sciences – including the deciphering of the human genome – can be
analysed as applications of literary tools of reading and writing in the Book of
Nature.51 Metaphors of coding and decoding have entered the public debate
about the progress of the life sciences and the possibilities of creating life in
the future. In this context we should not forget that – as has been shown by
Philipp Sarasin who builds on Ludwik Fleck’s sociology of knowledge – scien-
tific metaphors are not “just metaphors” but clear indications of how a society
structures what it regards as reality.52 Let me illustrate this with two scientific
incidents that have reached a wide audience after the turn of the twenty-first
century.
    On 26 June 2000, the White House organized a news conference to cel-
ebrate the finalization of the first phase of the Human Genome Project that
resulted in the decipherment of the entire structure of the human genome.
Speaking at this conference were US President Bill Clinton; the head of the
Human Genome Project, Dr Francis S. Collins; and Dr J. Craig Venter, head of
Celera Genomics, a company that also participated in the race to decipher the
human genome. The British Prime Minister Tony Blair participated via satel-
lite. Bill Clinton addressed the scientific breakthrough as follows:

      Today’s announcement represents more than just an epoch-­
      making triumph of science and reason. After all, when Galileo dis-
      covered he could use the tools of mathematics and mechanics to
      understand the motion of celestial bodies, he felt, in the words of
      one eminent researcher, that he had learned the language in which

 49. As a comparison between early modern magic and the “disenchanted magic” of modernity,
     see Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of the World”.
 50. For a more detailed discussion of these examples, I refer the reader again to my Locations of
     Knowledge; for Schelling’s philosophy of nature, see also von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und
     Esoterik, 195–201.
 51. See von Stuckrad, “Rewriting the Book of Nature”; Kay, “In the Beginning was the Word?”;
     Brandt, Metapher und Experiment.
 52. See Sarasin, “Infizierte Körper, kontaminierte Sprachen”. See also the classic study by Lakoff
     & Johnson, Metaphors We Live By.


                                                                                              239
kocku von stuckrad



        God created the universe. – Today we are learning the language in
        which God created life. We are gaining ever more awe for the com-
        plexity, the beauty, the wonder of God’s most divine and sacred
        gift.53

Clinton, despite all his pathos, is aware of the transgressive potential of the
Human Genome Project vis-à-vis theologically defined borders. Learning the
language of God means that we can also write it. So he warns his audience:

        The third horizon that lies before us is one that science cannot
        approach alone. It is the horizon that represents the ethical, moral
        and spiritual dimension of the power we now possess. We must
        not shrink from exploring that far frontier of science. But as we
        consider how to use new discoveries, we must also not retreat from
        our oldest and most cherished human values.54

Francis S. Collins is also very much aware of the transgressive potential of his
endeavour. In his speech at the same conference, he addresses this potential
right away: “Alexander Pope wrote: ‘Know then, thyself. Presume not God to
scan. The proper study of mankind is man.’ What more powerful form of study
of mankind could there be than to read our own instruction book?”55 It may be
questioned whether Alexander Pope’s prescription is a solution to the trans-
gressive danger that Collins intends to avoid, but it clearly shows his concerns.
Collins then proclaims: “Today we celebrate the revelation of the first draft of
the human book of life.” But again, he feels the need to put forward an ethical
disclaimer:

        It is humbling for me and awe-inspiring to realize that we have
        caught the first glimpse of our own instruction book, previously
        known only to God. What a profound responsibility it is to do this
        work. Historians will consider this a turning point.56

They surely will! But the turning point is exactly what Collins plays down:
what we witness is the most recent chapter in a long history of “scanning God”,
in Alexander Pope’s poetic words.
   I now come to a very recent event in the history of science. This event is
closely related to J. Craig Venter who is a representative of the field of “syn-
thetic biology”. As we have seen already, Venter was involved with the Human
Genome Project, though in a competitive research group. After 2000, Venter

 53.   Anon., “Reading the Book of Life”.
 54.   Ibid.
 55.   Ibid.
 56.   Ibid.


240
                                              discursive transfers and reconfigurations



took his career in various directions. Using US$100 million from Celera and
other stock holdings, he started a non-profit organization, the J. Craig Venter
Science Foundation. This organization freed him to do any kind of science
he wanted without obligation to an academic review panel or other con-
straints. In 2002, the foundation launched the Institute for Biological Energy
Alternatives in Rockville, Maryland. In May 2010, Venter’s team succeeded in
creating, for the first time, a fully synthetic new cell. In other words, a new life
form. In The New York Times we read:

      At a press conference Thursday, Dr Venter described the converted
      cell as “the first self-replicating species we’ve had on the planet
      whose parent is a computer”. “This is a philosophical advance as
      much as a technical advance,” he said, suggesting that the “syn-
      thetic cell” raised new questions about the nature of life. … “It’s
      very powerful to be able to reconstruct and own every letter in a
      genome because that means you can put in different genes,” said
      Gerald Joyce, a biologist at the Scripps Research Institute in La
      Jolla, Calif. In response to the scientific report, President Obama
      asked the White House bioethics commission on Thursday to
      complete a study of the issues raised by synthetic biology within
      six months and report back to him on its findings. He said the new
      development raised “genuine concerns,” though he did not specify
      them further.57

There is even more fascinating material for our topic in this little story. When
they synthesized their cell, Venter and his team introduced several distinctive
markers into its genome. All of them were found in the synthetic cell when it
was sequenced. These markers do not make any proteins, but they contain the
names of 46 scientists that were involved with the project, as well as several
quotations written out in a secret code. The markers also contain the key to
the code. It is necessary to crack the code in order to read the messages. But
Venter provided some hints as to the content of these quotations: “To live, to
err, to fall, to triumph, to recreate life out of life”, which is taken from James
Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man; “See things not as they are
but as they might be”, which comes from American Prometheus, a biography
of nuclear physicist Robert Oppenheimer; and the famous words by physicist
Richard Feynman: “What I cannot build I cannot understand.”58
   Coding and decoding, reading and writing the book of nature and the
book of life, the playing-God motive, the creation of a golem – with all its
ethical challenges – all this has been part of Western intellectual, religious and


 57. Wade, “Researchers Say They Created a ‘Synthetic Cell’”.
 58. See Callaway, “Immaculate Creation”.


                                                                                   241
kocku von stuckrad



s­ cientific history. It is the heritage that Venter, Collins and others, consciously
 or unconsciously, are building on. Venter himself maintains that he has not
 created life. “We’ve created the first synthetic cell”, he argues. “We definitely
 have not created life from scratch because we used a recipient cell to boot up
 the synthetic chromosome.” In the New Scientist, we can read:

      Whether you agree or not is a philosophical question, not a sci-
      entific one as there is no biological difference between synthetic
      bacteria and the real thing, says Andy Ellington, a synthetic biolo-
      gist at the University of Texas in Austin. “The bacteria didn’t have a
      soul, and there wasn’t some animistic property of the bacteria that
      changed,” he says.59