closed each day.60 Even with these intensive measures, however, copies of the
documents were made and soon found their way onto the Internet. In October
1994, they appeared on the newsgroup alt-religion.scientology, formed three
years earlier in order to facilitate critical discussion of the Church. The real
battle started, however, when a former high-ranking Scientologist named
Dennis Erlich began to comment regularly on the site. In January 1995, attor-
neys from the RTC attempted to have alt-religion.scientology removed from
the Internet, and then filed a massive lawsuit against Erlich for copyright
violations.
    Despite the Church’s legal efforts, however, the Fishman affidavit along with
all of the confidential OT materials reappeared on alt-religion.scientology in
July 1995, and have since been reproduced and disseminated in multiple lan-
guages across the World Wide Web. Today, ironically, the Fishman papers are
among the first things one encounters when beginning to explore information
about Scientology online. As Wollersheim observes, the Fishman papers have
now been “translated, encrypted, and hid just about anywhere you can imag-
ine around the world … [Scientology] tried to put out a fire with matches and
gasoline”.61
    Moreover, the Church’s legal and extra-legal wars in cyberspace have also
continued into the twenty-first century. In 2002, lawyers representing the
Church targeted Google, the web’s most powerful search engine, demand-
ing the removal of confidential Scientology materials – most notably, the
secret OT materials – along with a list of allegedly infringing URLs (these
demands have been only minimally successful).62 Far more audacious, how-
ever, was the Church’s war against Wikipedia. In May 2009 Wikipedia’s arbi-
tration council voted 10–0 to ban any users coming from any IP addresses
owned by the Church of Scientology or its associates. The landmark action
was taken because the Church was found to have repeatedly and deceptively
edited hundreds of articles related to the controversial religion, thus damaging
Wikipedia’s reputation for neutrality.63
    Finally, perhaps the Church’s most formidable opponent in cyberspace has
come from an unexpected source: the loose, decentralized network of Internet
users known as “Anonymous”. Less a coherent movement than a sort of com-
plex, shifting and anarchic collective, Anonymous first began to target the
Church of Scientology in January 2008 after the leak of a confidential video
featuring Tom Cruise. The video in question is a nine-minute promotional
interview, with Cruise talking about his intense commitment to Scientology
and urging other Church members to commit themselves just as intensely.


 60.   Brill & Packard, “Silencing Scientology’s Critics on the Internet”, 9–10.
 61.   Prendergast, “Stalking the Net”.
 62.   Sherman, “Google Airs Scientology Infringement Demand”.
 63.   Singel, “Wikipedia Bans Church of Scientology”.


                                                                                           195
hugh b . urban



    The video was leaked to YouTube on 15 January 2008 – the same day that
Andrew Morton’s highly critical Tom Cruise: An Unauthorized Biography was
released in bookstores worldwide. The video was viewed millions of times, and
was apparently considered so embarrassing and so damaging that lawyers rep-
resenting the Church and Cruise immediately demanded that it be removed.
And so it was, but not before it had already spread virally to numerous sites
throughout the Internet. Scientology’s threats against YouTube became a
powerful catalyst for the Anonymous collective, which saw this as a danger-
ous attack on free speech and the open flow of information online. Dubbed
“Project Chanology” (from chan message boards), the new Anonymous initia-
tive was aimed at fighting Scientology’s intense information control with the
anarchic powers of the Internet. Indeed, as one member of Anonymous put it,
“The Internet is Serious Business”, and Scientology immediately became a kind
of icon for all the bullying corporate powers that try to squelch the free circu-
lation of knowledge in cyberspace.64 According to its own video “Message to
Scientology” released in January 2008, Anonymous has determined that this
organization

      should be destroyed. For the good of your followers, for the good
      of mankind, and for our own enjoyment, we shall proceed to expel
      you from the internet and systematically dismantle the Church of
      Scientology in its present form.65

Today, Anonymous makes sophisticated use of both virtual and physical tac-
tics in its war against Scientology. Shortly after the conflict began in 2008, a
distributed denial of service (DDOS) attack was launched against Scientology
websites, temporarily shutting them down with high volumes of traffic.66 A
year later, in May 2009, a 19-year old New Jersey man pleaded guilty for his role
in the attacks, identifying himself as a member of Anonymous.67 More com-
monly, however, the Anonymous collective has relied on legal and (arguably
more effective) cyber tactics. They make use of a wide array of websites to share
guerrilla tactics and coordinate protests, including Encyclopedia Dramatica
and Facebook, where their page had over 11,000 fans as of October 2010.
   Anonymous’s protests, however, have not been limited to cyber-attacks.
The movement has been active worldwide, protesting physically outside
Scientology churches across the globe, from Copenhagen to Clearwater,
Florida and Columbus, Ohio. Members usually mask themselves, either with
bandanas or, more often, with Guy Fawkes masks modelled on those in the


 64. Landers, “Serious Business”.
 65. “Anonymous”, “Message to Scientology”.
 66. In a DDOS attack, hackers use so many zombie computers to visit a site that the server
     overload becomes crippling and the site crashes.
 67. Sarno, “Anonymous Hacker Pleads Guilty”.


196
                                                               the secrets of scientology



film V for Vendetta. Anonymous protestors typically carry an array of signs
bearing slogans such as “Religion is free: Scientology is neither”, “$cientol-
ogy kills” and “Google ‘Fair Game’”. One of the more colourful protests even
had a pirate theme and was an event called “Operation Sea Arrrgh” (a play on
Scientology’s elite inner group, the “Sea Org” or Sea Organization), highlight-
ing their keen sense of irony and satire.68
   Perhaps the most damaging aspect of Anonymous’s war on Scientology,
however, has simply been its decentralized but utterly pervasive ability to dis-
seminate information – including the most esoteric OT materials and other
confidential Church documents – wildly (and indeed infinitely) in cyberspace.69
Despite the Church’s myriad lawsuits and its ongoing wars with Anonymous
and other enemies online, Scientology’s most esoteric advanced technology
continues to proliferate endlessly in the digital realm. As of December 2010,
a simple Google search on “OT III” produced over 44,000 hits, while a search
on “Xenu” produced over 700,000. Clearly, the Church is not winning its war
of secrecy and knowledge control in cyberspace. Indeed, various observers
have noted that the Internet may well prove to be “Scientology’s Waterloo” –
that is, a battle of information that it cannot realistically win.70 As such, some
critics are quite pessimistic about Scientology’s ability to survive its new wars
in the information age. As ex-Scientologist Gerry Armstrong commented
in an interview with me in August 2009, he believes that this could well be
“the last generation of Scientologists”, since young people today grow up on
the Internet, live increasingly in cyberspace and get all of their information
online.71 It is difficult, he thinks, to foresee great numbers of converts com-
ing from a generation that has ready access not just to the secret OT levels on
hundreds of websites, but also to countless YouTube videos and South Park
clips that ridicule the beliefs and practices of Scientology.
   As author and former Scientologist William S. Burroughs noted in 1978,
well before the dawn of the Internet, “if the Scientologists persist in self-
imposed isolation and in withholding their materials from those best ­qualified

 68. McKee, “Taking it to the Streets”.
 69. It is worth noting that the Anonymous collective became involved in another major war
     over information control and free speech on the Internet in late 2010, this time inspired
     by the controversy surrounding the whistleblower website, Wikileaks. After its release
     of numerous US State Department diplomatic cables in November 2010, Wikileaks was
     widely criticized by various governments, and several financial corporations, includ-
     ing Visa, MasterCard and PayPal, suspended transactions with the organization. Seeing
     this as another profound threat to free speech and the flow of information online, mem-
     bers of Anonymous launched DDOS attacks on Visa, MasterCard, PayPal and, for good
     measure, Sarah Palin, temporarily shutting down their websites. As such, the Anonymous
     group continues to raise profound questions about the very nature of secrecy, knowledge
     and information control in the new public sphere of the Internet. See BBC, “Anonymous
     Hacktivists Say Wikileaks War to Continue”.
 70. Cook, “Cult Friction”.
 71. Telephone interview by author, 10 August 2009.


                                                                                         197
hugh b . urban



to evaluate … them, they may well find themselves bypassed”.72 In the ­digital
age, when even the most intense efforts of the RTC appear to be largely
unsuccessful at staunching the relentless flow of information in cyberspace,
Burroughs may well prove to be correct. As Hubbard himself remarked in
1954, “you cannot unveil the SECRET and have it ever be quite so secret
again”.73


CONCLUSIONS: THE DUAL NATURE OF SECRECY – ESOTERIC RELIGIONS
IN AN AGE OF INFORMATION, SURVEILLANCE AND TERRORISM