11. Carroll & Tober, The Indigo Children, 5.
 12. The physical colours according to Tappe are no colour, magenta, red, pink, orange, lavender
     and tan (which is also mental).
 13. The mental colours are tan, yellow and green.
 14. These are blue and violet.
 15. Tappe, Understanding your Life Thru Color, 128.
 16. Ibid., 317.
 17. Ibid. Since Tappe’s book is published in 1986 this would indicate that Indigo Children
     started appearing in 1969 or 1970, which is much earlier than the date given by later Indigo
     theorists. Although this is interesting to consider, there is no literary record of the Indigo
     Child phenomenon before Tappe’s book.
 18. Ibid.
 19. Ibid., 318–21.

354
                                                                                   the new kids



of science fiction-based toys and programmes, seeing this as connected with
their “interstellar interests”.20 Sarah Whedon furthermore notes how Tappe
initiates the association of Indigos with millennialism and 2012.21
    Nancy Ann Tappe leaves few clues as to her potential influences and inspi-
rations in creating her elaborate system of colours, or her more specific idea
of a new group of specially gifted children that she names Indigos. She does
have a bibliography, but it only contains two books, both of which are works
by Faber Birren, a specialist in colour theory.22 Birren’s books appear to have
influenced her ideas about colour, or perhaps simply confirmed her “synaes-
thetic” sense of them, but they contain nothing to specifically inspire favourit-
ism for the colour indigo or to encourage the idea of a specially evolved new
generation of children.
    Other potential sources for Tappe’s ideas, and thus the whole Indigo Child
discourse, are the Spiritualist and Theosophical movements of the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries. Theosophical ideas presage many New Age
ideas, in particular the discussion of auras, spiritual colours and their con-
nection to “spiritual evolution”. The originator of the concept of auras and
energy healing, as passed into the New Age, is the mesmerist and spiritual-
ist Phineas Parkhurst Quimby (1802–66). He is also famous as the originator
of the “New Thought” movement, based on the belief that the mind has the
power to heal simply through believing one is healed.23 It was in his works
that the notion of a spiritual halo that can be perceived by a clairvoyant was
first posited.24 Although Quimby originated the idea of auras, it is the work
of Charles Webster Leadbeater (1854–1934) that introduces the idea of the
colour scheme of the aura. A key text for understanding his idea of the auric
colour scheme is Man Visible and Invisible.25 Leadbeater was one of the key
figures in early twentieth-century Theosophy. He was an active occultist and
psychic, using his clairvoyance to contact the Theosophical masters, explore
distant times, discover the qualities of matter, and explicate past lives.26 He
spent much of his life searching for and training different boys in the hope that
one of them would be the “world teacher”, a boy who would be the next spir-
itual leader.27

 20. Ibid., 321–2.
 21. Whedon, “The Wisdom of Indigo Children”, 66. For an explication of the 2012 movement,
     see Defesche, “The 2012 Phenomenon”.
 22. The two entries are: Birren, Color Psychology and Color Therapy, and Birren, New Horizons
     in Color.
 23. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 485.
 24. Ibid., 486.
 25. Leadbeater, Man Visible and Invisible.
 26. Tillet, The Elder Brother. See also the discussion of Leadbeater in Chapter 8 of this volume.
 27. Leadbeater had a complex and rather problematic relationship with children and the spirit-
     ual. Throughout his life he sought out young boys who might prove to be the next spiritual
     master or “world teacher”. He also was accused of pederasty in 1906 and chose to resign
     from the Theosophical Society for several years to avoid scandal. Furthermore he was

                                                                                             355
daniel kline



   In Man Visible and Invisible, Leadbeater describes the qualities and appear-
ance of the various spiritual or “astral” bodies. In his discussion of the mean-
ing of various colours in an individual’s aura Leadbeater makes no connection
between indigo and spiritually developed children. Rather, indigo is described
as one of the many derivations of the colour blue, which Leadbeater equates
with the “religious feeling” in its various forms.28 In comparing Leadbeater’s
scheme with Nancy Ann Tappe’s it seems likely that the latter is to some extent
inspired by the former. As interesting as this may be, Leadbeater’s lack of
emphasis upon the particular colour indigo, or its relation to children, leaves
the conclusion that the concept of Indigo Children was not directly derived
from Theosophy but was more likely to be an innovation of Tappe’s. Thus it
would seem that Tappe, influenced by colour theory from Theosophy and
other sources, has laid the foundations from which other authors expanded
the ideas into what has become the Indigo Child phenomenon, wherein chil-
dren are seen as sources of hope, religious teaching and ultimately the salva-
tion of an endangered planet.


WHAT IS AN INDIGO CHILD?

According to Jan Tober and Lee Carroll, “an Indigo Child is one who displays a
new and unusual set of psychological attributes and shows a pattern of behav-
iour generally undocumented before”.29 To clarify this description, almost
every book in the literature on Indigo Children contains a checklist for deter-
mining whether your child or you yourself are in fact an Indigo. These check-
lists range from extremely vague to quite specific in their criteria. Here are
two examples, the first taken from Lee Carroll and Jan Tober’s book The Indigo
Children:

      Ten of the most common traits of Indigo Children:

        1. They come into the world with a feeling of royalty (and often
           act like it).
        2. They have a feeling of “deserving to be here,” and are surprised
           when others don’t share that.
        3. Self worth is not a big issue. They often tell the parents “who
           they are.”
        4. They have difficulty with absolute authority (authority without
           explanation or choice).

     reported to have a teenage boy companion who slept with him in his room. See Lutyens,
     Krishnamurti, 203. For more on the biography of Leadbeater see Tillet, The Elder Brother.
 28. Leadbeater, Man Visible and Invisible, 71.
 29. Carroll & Tober, The Indigo Children, 1.


356
                                                                    the new kids



      5. They simply will not do certain things; for example, waiting in
         line is difficult for them.
      6. They get frustrated with systems that are ritual-oriented and
         don’t require creative thought.
      7. They often see better ways of doing things, both at home and
         in school, which makes them seem like “system busters” (non-
         conforming to any system).
      8. They are antisocial unless they are with their own kind. If there
         are no others of like consciousness around them, they often
         turn inward, feeling like no other human understands them.
         School is often extremely difficult for them socially.
      9. They will not respond to “guilt” discipline (“Wait till your
         father gets home and finds out what you did”).
     10. They are not shy in letting you know what they need.30

Another extensive list, which is more embedded in New Age culture, comes
from Doreen Virtue’s book The Care and Feeding of Indigo Children:

     •   Strong willed
     •   Born in 1978 or later
     •   Headstrong
     •   Creative, with an artistic flair for music, jewellery making,
         poetry, etc.
     •   Prone to addictions
     •   An “old soul” as if they’re 13, going on 43
     •   Intuitive or psychic, possibly with a history of seeing angels or
         deceased people
     •   An Isolationist, either through aggressive acting-out, or through
         fragile introversion
     •   Independent and proud, even if they’re constantly asking you
         for money
     •   Possesses a deep desire to help the world in a big way
     •   Wavers between low self-esteem and grandiosity
     •   Bores easily
     •   Has probably been diagnosed as having ADD or ADHD
     •   Prone to insomnia, restless sleep, nightmares, or difficulty/fear
         of falling asleep
     •   Has a history of depression, or even suicidal thoughts or attempts
     •   Looks for real, deep, and lasting friendships
     •   Easily bonds with plants or animals31


30. Ibid., 1–2.
31. Virtue, The Care and Feeding of Indigo Children, 19–20.


                                                                              357
daniel kline



With reference to Virtue’s list, she states that

       if your children responded positively to 14 or more of the above
       characteristics, then they’re most likely Indigos. If they related to
       between 11 and 13 of the above characteristics, they’re probably
       “Indigos in training”, or those who are just developing their “little
       lightworker” traits.32

These two checklists are typical of the Indigo discourse. Indigos are charac-
terized by individualism, independence, alternate learning styles, and a spe-
cial spiritual or metaphysical openness or giftedness. Doreen Virtue succinctly
describes an Indigo Child as “someone who is highly sensitive with a warrior
personality”.33 Another of Virtue’s definitions of Indigos derives from The Care
and Feeding of Indigo Children, in which she states that:

       Children who were born in the mid-1970s through the present
       day are often called Indigo Children because they are, literally,
       “Children of the indigo ray.” They are highly psychic, and they take
       their psychic visions and knowingness for granted. Their Spiritual
       gifts are so highly attuned that they’re often gifted (although they
       may think of it as cursed) in other life areas as well.34