CONTEMPORARY ESOTERICISM
Gnostica: Texts and Interpretations
Series editors: Garry Trompf, Kocku von Stuckrad, Iain Gardner and
Jason BeDuhn

Gnostica publishes works of scholarly interpretations on esoteric movements,
including the Gnostic, Hermetic, Manichaean, Theosophical and related tradi-
tions. Contributions also include critical editions of texts, historical case stud-
ies, critical analyses, cross-cultural comparisons and state-of-the-art surveys.


Published

Contemporary Esotericism
Edited by Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm

Angels of Desire: Esoteric Bodies, Aesthetics and Ethics
Jay Johnston
CONTEMPORARY ESOTERICISM

Edited by
Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm
For Peter Steele (1962–2010)
“Don’t mistake lack of talent for genius”




Published by Equinox Publishing Ltd.
UK: Unit S3, Kelham House, 3 Lancaster Street, Sheffield, S3 8AF
USA: ISD, 70 Enterprise Drive, Bristol, CT 06010

www.equinoxpub.com

First published 2013

Editorial matter and selection © Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm 2013
Individual contributions © the contributors 2013

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or
any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the
publishers.

ISBN: 978-1-908049-32-2 (hardback)

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Contemporary esotericism / edited by Egil Asprem & Kennet Granholm.
    p. cm.
   Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index.
   ISBN 978-1-908049-32-2 (hardback)
  1. Occultism. I. Asprem, Egil. II. Granholm, Kennet, 1977-
   BF1411.C65 2012
   130—dc23
                                                     2012019506


Typeset by JS Typesetting Ltd, Porthcawl, Mid Glamorgan.
Printed and bound in the UK by MPG Books Group.
Contents




   Contributors                                                    ix

 1 Introduction                                                     1
   Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm

PART I: TRADITION
 2 Constructing Esotericisms: Sociological, Historical and
   Critical Approaches to the Invention of Tradition               25
   Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm
 3 Inventing Africa: Esotericism and the Creation of an
   Afrocentric Tradition in America                                49
   Fredrik Gregorius
 4 Secret Lineages and de Facto Satanists: Anton LaVey’s Use of
   Esoteric Tradition                                              72
   Per Faxneld
 5 Perennialism and Iconoclasm: Chaos Magick and the
   Legitimacy of Innovation                                        91
   Colin Duggan

PART II: POPULAR CULTURE AND NEW MEDIA
 6 Occulture is Ordinary                                          113
   Christopher Partridge
 7 From Book to Bit: Enacting Satanism Online                     134
   Jesper Aagaard Petersen
contents



 8 Accessing the Astral with a Monitor and Mouse: Esoteric
   Religion and the Astral Located in Three-Dimensional
   Virtual Realms                                                  159
   John L. Crow
 9 The Secrets of Scientology: Concealment, Information Control
   and Esoteric Knowledge in the World’s Most Controversial
   New Religion                                                    181
   Hugh B. Urban
10 Hidden Knowledge, Hidden Powers: Esotericism and
   Conspiracy Culture                                              200
   Asbjørn Dyrendal

PART III: ESOTERIC TRANSFERS
11 Discursive Transfers and Reconfigurations: Tracing the
   Religious and the Esoteric in Secular Culture                   226
   Kocku von Stuckrad
12 Radical Politics and Political Esotericism: The Adaptation of
   Esoteric Discourse within the Radical Right                     244
   Jacob Christiansen Senholt
13 New Age Spirituality and Islamic Jihad: Paulo Coelho’s Manual
   of the Warrior of Light and Shamil Basayev’s Manual of the
   Mujahid                                                         265
   Eduard ten Houten
14 Deep Ecology and the Study of Western Esotericism               287
   Joseph Christian Greer

PART IV: LEAVING THE MARGINS
15 The Secular, the Post-Secular and the Esoteric in the Public
   Sphere                                                          309
   Kennet Granholm
16 Psychic Enchantments of the Educated Classes: The Paranormal
   and the Ambiguities of Disenchantment                           330
   Egil Asprem
17 The New Kids: Indigo Children and New Age Discourse             351
   Daniel Kline
18 A Small-Town Health Centre in Sweden: Perspectives on the
   Western Esotericism Debate                                      372
   Liselotte Frisk


vi
                                                         contents



19 Entheogenic Esotericism                                   392
   Wouter J. Hanegraaff
20 A Deliciously Troubling Duo: Gender and Esotericism       410
   Jay Johnston

   Bibliography, Discography and Filmography                 426
   Index                                                     463




                                                              vii
Contributors




Egil Asprem is research fellow at the Center for History of Hermetic Phil­
osophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands.

John L. Crow is a graduate student at the Religion Department, Florida State
University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA. He received his MA at the Center
for History of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Colin Duggan is PhD research fellow in the study of religions, University
College Cork, Ireland. He received his MA at the Center for History of
Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Asbjørn Dyrendal is professor of religious studies, Norwegian University of
Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Per Faxneld is PhD research fellow in history of religions, Stockholm Uni­
versity, Sweden.

Liselotte Frisk is professor of religious studies, Dalarna University, Sweden.

Kennet Granholm is assistant professor in history of religions, Stockholm
University, Sweden, and docent in comparative religion, Åbo Akademi Uni­
versity, Finland. In 2007–8 he was visiting research fellow at the Center
for History of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of
Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Joseph Christian Greer is PhD research fellow at the Center for History
of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

                                                                             ix
contributors



Fredrik Gregorius is visiting researcher in the Department of Sociology,
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA.

Wouter J. Hanegraaff is professor of history of hermetic philosophy and
related currents, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Jay Johnston is senior lecturer in the Department of Studies in Religion,
University of Sydney, and in the Sherman School of Art History and Art
Education, College on Fine Arts, University of New South Wales, Australia.

Daniel Kline received his MA at the Center for History of Hermetic Phil­
osophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands. He lives
in Vancouver, Canada, where he works as a clinical counsellor.

Christopher Partridge is professor of religious studies at Lancaster Uni­
versity, UK.

Jesper Aagaard Petersen is associate professor at the Programme for Teacher
Education, NTNU, Trondheim, Norway.

Jacob Christiansen Senholt is PhD research fellow in the history of ideas,
Aarhus University, Denmark. He received his MA at the Center for History
of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.

Eduard ten Houten received his MA at the Center for History of Hermetic
Philosophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands.

Hugh B. Urban is professor of religious studies, Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Kocku von Stuckrad is professor of religious studies at the University of
Groningen, Netherlands. In 2004–9 he was lecturer at the Center for History
of Hermetic Philosophy and Related Currents, University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.




x
chapter 1

INTRODUCTION
Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm




The academic study of Western esotericism is well into its second decade
of professionalization and institutionalization. University departments and
study programmes have been established, specialist book series and journals
launched, academic societies founded, and several international conferences
and panels are organized every year. In addition, scholars in other subdisci-
plines of religious studies are starting to take notice of the scholarship pro-
duced within the field. However, the religious studies scholars who are most
likely to take an interest will also notice a striking gap in scholarship on the
esoteric: very little research exists on contemporary phenomena. Several con-
temporary currents that can be regarded as historically and/or typologically
related to esotericism have been the focus of scholars in other branches of
religious studies. For example, sociologists of new religious movements have
debated “New Age spiritualities” for decades, and “pagan studies”1 has in


   1. So-called “pagan studies” is a problematic field, which often seems more interested in
      developing (neo)pagan theology than conducting unbiased and critical scholarly investiga-
      tion (for a critical review of the state of the field, see Davidsen, “What is Wrong with Pagan
      Studies?”). This links to choices of terminology regarding the subject matter. Whereas
      “neopaganism” is more common among North American scholars, signalling that it is a
      new religious movement, European scholars (predominately British) tend to prefer “pagan-
      ism”, often in the plural, in order to show that there are many pagan traditions, and with his-
      torical qualifiers such as “modern” or “contemporary” (see Melissa Harrington, “Paganism
      and the New Age”, 437). In this volume we have made the editorial decision to use “neo­
      paganism”, partly in order to distance ourselves from what we consider problematic aspects
      of pagan studies, and partly in order to make it clear that we are dealing with modern reli-
      gions with no historically valid claim to continuity with their pre-Christian namesakes. It
      should be noted, however, that the use of “neo” has problems of its own, as it can be taken
      to imply that some form of semi-uniform “pagan tradition” existed in Europe before the
      introduction of Christianity, with various expressions simply demonstrating external vari-
      ations to an essentially similar inner core. This is not the case, of course, and therefore


                                                                                                   1
egil asprem and kennet granholm