In this section the major themes and strategies for thinking gender in the field
of Western esotericism are examined. It is not intended to provide a com-
prehensive survey but rather to highlight the diverse nature of their inter-
section and to provide instructive examples of scholarly approaches and
analysis. The subheadings below designate dominant themes and broad areas
of inquiry; however they are not presented as fixed categories, and, as will
become apparent, many of the examples cited can be placed in more than one
simultaneously. It must be noted that the vast majority of these studies are
quite contemporary; for far too long the discipline of Western esotericism –
alongside other humanities disciplines – has reproduced the use of “man” in
some type of gender “neutral” sense (although it is far from clear how such
neutrality can be conceptualized) when “human” might have been a more sali-
ent choice. Indeed, this is not only a historical blindness, and accounts exist
in which the history of Western esotericism can be presented as a series of
charismatic individuals and the movements they founded; the vast majority of
which are men (with a few notorious exceptions). The question as to whether
this is a historically accurate reflection of the tradition(s), or an outcome of
the biases of dominant reportage, remains. Indeed, what is most troubling
is that it seems that the question has yet to even be ­adequately asked. The
potential answers to such questions would be complex, multiple, partial but
so important for both the history which they “present” but also the reflections
on research methodology and the process of historicity they would necessarily
produce.


Sacred sexuality

The often implicit sexualization of esoteric discourses is the “elephant in the
essay” in any consideration of the relation of gender discourses to the disci-
pline. That gender is not equivalent to sex, nor can the two terms be consid-
ered to exist in any clear-cut relation to one another, or to any specific aspect

412
                                                       a deliciously troubling duo



of embodied existence, has been explored above; nonetheless, the binary logic
through which esotericism is placed as the dominant discourses’ “other” as
deviant evokes associations with the transgressive. Therefore, this – to an
extent – both feminizes and sexualizes the discursive field (a point that will
be considered in more detail in the discussion of epistemology below). This
positioning is coupled with content that addresses sex, desire and the erotic
in a multiplicity of ways, and hence the libidinous associations with the field
remain. This conceptual association is well illustrated in volumes such as
Hanegraaff and Kripal’s Hidden Intercourse: Eros and Sexuality in the History
of Western Esotericism:

       Indeed, what is so striking about so many of the figures treated in
       these essays is their conviction that in the depths of human sexu-
       ality lies hidden the secret of religion, occultism, magical power,
       spirituality, transcendence, life, God, Being itself. This astonishing
       connection, such figures would insist, is not metaphorical, or rhe-
       torical, or symbolic, as some would prefer to have it. It is funda-
       mental, cosmic, ontological, religious.5

Here, in this introductory statement, is an example of the deeply intersectional
nature of esoteric and gender discourse. Both are being positioned as implicit
in a concept of subjectivity, and sexuality – or I would argue, more specifically
desire – is identified as an element of esoteric discourse which signals an onto-
logical, spiritual formation. Foucauldian approaches to the topic would stress
the relatively recent “invention” of an individual’s sex/gender orientation as
the marker of identity/individuality. That is, that sexualities’ implicit interrela-
tion with ontology, with concepts of the self and identity are the result of very
specific socio-cultural contexts and therefore that one’s sexual orientation has
not always been laden with the expectation that it reveals the essence of self-­
identity or indeed the nature of life, the cosmos, or the divine itself.
   Nonetheless, the intertwining of sexual orientation and practices with
ontological, religious beliefs is most certainly a feature of contemporary eso-
teric practices. Hugh Urban’s Magia Sexualis: Sex, Magic and Liberation in
Modern Western Esotericism provides a particularly erudite account of the
positioning of sexuality in occult thought from the nineteenth-century sex
magic of Paschal Beverly Randolph to contemporary Chaos Magick. The text
investigates the most significant cultural “moments” of this intertwining of
discourses, including Western tantra, neopaganism and the notorious Aleister
Crowley. Urban’s exploration clearly places these sex magic discourses and
their accompanying concepts of gender and subjectivity, as articulating very
precise social, political and religious debates and anxieties. Indeed, Urban


   5. Kripal & Hanegraaff, “Introduction”, xiv.


                                                                                413
jay johnston



identifies the discourses on sex magic as significant elements in the nineteenth
century’s proliferating discourses on sexuality:

      the Victorian era was by no means simply an era of prudish repres-
      sion and denial of sexuality; on the contrary, the nineteenth cen-
      tury witnessed an unprecedented explosion of discourse about
      sex, which was now categorized, classified, debated, and dis-
      cussed in endless titillating detail. A key part of this discourse on
      sexuality, I would suggest, was the new literature on sexual magic,
      which spread throughout the United States, England, and Western
      Europe from the mid-nineteenth century onward.6

In one of the most significant essays on this topic, Joy Dixon maps how the
development – and pathologization – of non-normative sexual identities cor-
relates and intersects with the development of new religious movements,
especially Theosophy and Spiritualism. “Sexology and the Occult: Sexuality
and Subjectivity in Theosophy’s New Age” traces not only the trope of equat-
ing homosexuality with heresy, but its ambiguous position in the thinking of
the early sexologists Havelock Ellis and Edward Carpenter. Indeed, she argues
that there was a marginalization of individual claims about spiritual belief in
early sexology’s case studies.7 Further, Dixon’s analysis identifies the particular
way that Theosophical concepts of reincarnation questioned the application of
a fixed gender identity to an “authentic subjectivity”. Therefore, from the per-
spective of occult science (rather than the science of sexology), “it is perhaps
not surprising that a female theosophist might prefer to think of herself not
as a neurotic, hysterical, or deviant woman but as a Viking warrior who had
only recently taken up residence in a woman’s body”.8 That is, Theosophical
propositions regarding the capacity for a gender orientation from a past life
to influence current gender identity, and indeed be implicit to spiritual devel-
opment provided counter-narratives to the articulation of normative subjec-
tivities and fixed gender identities espoused by sexologists of the era. It would
seem with this example that the correlation of alternative spiritual beliefs
with non-normative gender identities worked to undermine rather than to
reinforce dominant binary logic. However, conservative approaches to gen-
der roles also remain evident. For example the heteronormative gender roles
attributed to spirit guides and their relation to the medium which “hosts” their
spirit recorded by Michael Brown in American New Age channelling culture.
This practice will often feature a female host and a male spirit entity: hence
the feminine is the body that “houses” the “wise” male spirit/consciousness.
The dimorphic gender attribution may be deployed in an effort to express

   6. Urban, Magia Sexualis, 1.
   7. Dixon, “Sexology and the Occult”, 289, 292.
   8. Ibid., 304.


414
                                                             a deliciously troubling duo



harmonious gender relations, as Brown also illustrates that the Theosophical
ideal for sacred androgyny remained vital in channelling culture, however, its
ascription in many cases continued to carry gender-normative stereotypes.9
   Although only two examples of contemporary academic work on the rela-
tion between sexuality and esoteric traditions, Urban and Dixon artfully illus-
trate what Joy would delineate as gender as a “critical tool” that she (following
Joan Scott) summarizes as “that there can be no ahistorical let alone ‘essential’
definitions, particularly on matters of sex and gender”.10 It is certainly true,
as Hanegraaff and Kripal claim, that the esoteric furnishes many examples of
beliefs and practices that position sexuality and the erotic at the ontological
heart of self and the divine, but it is equally true as Dixon’s work demonstrates,
that esoteric discourses have also challenged normative accounts of the fixed
sexual subject or the centrality of sex/gender to identity.

Gender in discourse and practice