LaVey was well read in the literature concerning older Satanism that was
available in the late 1960s, and fairly faithfully reproduces its accounts of the
phenomenon.43 He is sharply critical of some examples of historical Satanism,
and for instance labels La Voisin’s activities in seventeenth century France
“organized fraud” and “degraded”.44 Some other predecessors fare better, nota-
bly Sir Francis Dashwood and his eighteenth-century Hell-Fire Club.
   This group has emerged as one of the most important sources of historical
inspiration for the Church of Satan. They are mentioned in several texts by
LaVey and in interviews with him in Barton’s books. More recently, attesting
to their significance, the current High Priest of the church celebrated a ritual
in caves on Dashwood’s former estate.45 Dashwood, according to LaVey, “man-
aged to conduct rituals replete with good dirty fun, and certainly provided
a colorful and harmless form of psychodrama”46 – much like LaVey himself,
one suspects the intended subtext is. In The Secret Life of a Satanist, LaVey’s
biographer Blanche Barton writes: “There had always been a Satanic under-
ground, centuries old, but there had never been an organized Satanic reli-
gion, practicing openly.”47 Yet, even though “there has never been a Church of
Satan before, there have been groups dedicated to similar principles”, and here
the Hell-Fire Club is given pride of place.48 Barton quotes LaVey concerning
Benjamin Franklin’s involvement with this clique of influential men: “If people
knew of the role the Hell Fire Club played in Benjamin Franklin’s structuring
of America, it could suggest changes like: ‘One nation, under Satan,’ or ‘United
Satanic America’.”49 Setting the club in such a historical frame has some simi-
larity to conspiracy theory – though one which celebrates the machinations of
the secret cabal instead of worrying about it.50 When LaVey hints that a found-
ing father of the United States may have been a Satanist, he makes Satanism a
crucial part of the perhaps most important grand narrative for Americans (the
creation of the Constitution and the founding of the nation). This construc-
tion of tradition may be done tongue in cheek, but even half-jokes will have an
effect when told many times.
   There is a tension in LaVey’s texts between wanting to be the founder of
the first real Satanic society, and referring to (often prestigious, like Franklin)
historical figures and groups as predecessors. In the collection of LaVey apho-
risms that conclude his last book, Satan Speaks!, one of them lays down: “The

 43. LaVey mentions books like Elliot Rose’s A Razor for a Goat (1962) and H. T. F. Rhodes’s The
     Satanic Mass (1954), which were standard works on the subject at the time (ibid., 21).
 44. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 102. On La Voisin, see Mollenauer, Strange Relevations.
 45. Peter H. Gilmore, interview by author, New York, 6 April 2011.
 46. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 102.
 47. Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 81.
 48. Ibid., 81.
 49. Ibid., 81–82.
 50. On LaVey and conspiracy theory, see Dyrendal, “Hidden Persuaders and Invisible Wars”,
     and Chapter 10 of the present volume.


                                                                                             81
per faxneld



only person in recorded history to codify Satanism into an applicable religion
is Anton Szandor LaVey.”51 In one of Barton’s books, LaVey is said to be “the
first man ever to found an above-ground organization dedicated to Satan and
the delights of the flesh”.52 These are rather guarded phrasings. Since “an appli-
cable religion” is a subjective assessment, and how to define “organization”
and “above-ground” is not self-evident either, it is hard to argue against LaVey
being first.
    If the Church of Satan was according to its own historical narrative the first
Satanic organization of note (and most scholars would agree), Anton LaVey
certainly never tried to lay claim to being the first Satanist. He considered,
as we shall see, some highly unexpected persons in history to be worthy of
this epithet. In Barton’s discussion of predecessors, she also mentions other
earlier “enclaves of Satanism”: Rabelais’s Abbey of Thelema, a circle of 1930s
Hollywood actors and Charles Fort’s Fortean Society.53 Most of these were
decidedly not Satanists in the sense that they used Satanic symbolism, but can
still be labelled thus if one employs the rather inclusive criteria suggested by
LaVey under the heading de facto Satanists.


DE FACTO SATANISTS

What constitutes a de facto Satanist, then? In an interview in Blanche Barton’s
The Church of Satan, LaVey talks of figures, “sometimes historical, sometimes
contemporary”, who he “would identify as de facto Satanists, even though
they might not have called themselves that because of the times they lived in.
But by their actions, their writings, their attitudes, you can see that they were
Satanists through and through.”54
    Even though the actual term is not used early on, the concept of de facto
Satanists crops up on numerous occasions throughout LaVey’s first publi-
cations as well. He writes of Galileo and Leonardo da Vinci that they “most
certainly were Satanic in the sense that they expressed ideas and theories des-
tined to break down the status quo”.55 Erotic sects in Russia were led by men
“whose visionary abilities, practices, and goals revealed them as Satanists of
the first order”.56
    LaVey presents what can best be described as an esoteric (in the sense that
it is only visible to those with the correct understanding) history of Satanism:


 51. LaVey, Satan Speaks!, 169.
 52. Barton, The Church of Satan, 116.
 53. Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 82. A nearly identical passage is found in Barton, The
     Church of Satan, 10–11.
 54. LaVey, quoted in Ibid., 70.
 55. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 32.
 56. Ibid., 133.


82
                                                    secret lineages and de facto satanists



“The pseudo-Satanist has always managed to appear throughout modern
history, with his black masses of varying degrees of blasphemy; but the real
Satanist is not quite so easily recognized as such.”57 The real Satanists are sim-
ply the most successful individuals in any given time, and not the people who
celebrate Satan.58 Since Satan to LaVey is a thing of fairy tale, a pure construct
and useful symbolic tool, it would be absurd to make him the focal point in
the same way God is for a Jew. Celebrating Satan is thus not necessary in order
to be a (de facto) Satanist. However, LaVey holds up men like Rasputin and
Cagliostro as examples of successful persons who, he claims, incidentally also
dabbled in the black arts.59 Their names are “links – clues so to speak, of the
true legacy of Satan”. Even if the esoteric is explicitly said not to be a necessary
ingredient in the making of a real Satanist, many of the actual examples pro-
vided have allegedly been involved with at least some form of esoteric prac-
tices. Hence, a tradition is constructed that does overlap with older esoteric
historiography.
    LaVey balances, especially later in his career, these esoteric forebears with
references to a different type of lineage. Satanism, he says, has its roots in
figures that “are all Satanic, always have been, but just might not have been
labeled that yet. There has always been a genetic strain of Satanists, but it’s just
now getting to the point where we can stand up to identify ourselves and our
forebears.”60 The idea of de facto Satanists – though later vaguely clothed in
“scientific” garb by introducing the idea of Satanists as a special genetic strain
– can be viewed as a form of Satanist perennialism: there is a worldview which
has always existed, in all cultures and times, but has not been known under a
single name. But now someone has come forward to proclaim what this ancient
wisdom (or ancient street-smart egocentric cynicism, as it were, in this spe-
cific case) is, to give it a name, and point out who the long series of respected
predecessors were, who all swore by this creed without using a specific word
for it. It is interesting to note that this perennialist approach to Satanism is
not entirely novel. Already Stanislaw Przybyszewski, mentioned earlier in this
chapter, had practically the same view.61 LaVey, however, did not derive this
idea from the Pole, but from a less specific reservoir of esotericist concepts.


 57. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 104.
 58. Ibid., 104. LaVey qualifies this notion by writing: “It would be an over-simplification to say
     that every successful man and woman on earth is, without knowing it, a practicing Satanist;
     but the thirst for earthly success and its ensuing realization are certainly grounds for Saint
     Peter turning thumbs down.” Exactly what then keeps all these people from being de facto
     Satanists is not entirely clear. What LaVey three years later writes of Galileo and others in
     The Satanic Rituals, as quoted above, could be the answer: the term is meant to encompass
     persons who were successful and at the same time challenged the status quo.
 59. Ibid., 104.
 60. Barton, The Church of Satan, 59 (emphasis added).
 61. Faxneld, “Witches, Nihilist Anarchism and Social Darwinism”. Przybyszewski’s concept of
     what the transhistorical Satanism entails was radically different on many levels, though.


                                                                                               83
per faxneld