While James was hardly the first to perceive a need for a new attitude towards
African and ancient history, as we have seen with Delany for example, he is
one of the first to completely shift the focus from Europe to Africa. Other
black nationalist leaders, like Marcus Garvey and W. E. B. Du Bois, usually
held up European civilization as the role model for a future African culture.28
Du Bois was particularly fond of Greek culture and made use of several clas-
sical references in his writings, even if he in later years started to be more
interested in ancient Egypt and African culture.29 James was also one of the
pioneers in focusing on a spirituality that is neither Christian nor Islamic as
the foundation for African people. Instead, he turned to what he considered to
be “ancient mystery traditions” and esoteric paths to self-deification. For mod-
ern Afrocentrists, James’s book has become a central work and is for some
almost above all forms of critique. According to Wilson J. Moses, however, it
has also been overemphasized by critics.30 James’s influence can even be seen

 27.   Ibid., 153.
 28.   Austin, Achieving Blackness, 189–90; Moses, Afrotopia, 59–60.
 29.   Ibid., 161–2.
 30.   Ibid., 92–3.


58
                                                                inventing africa



in contemporary music: for example, the rap-artist Nas’s song ‘I can’ (2002)
ends with an appeal for young (primarily black) people to study the true his-
tory of the world. In the final verse we find how James’s view of history can be
used to further a moral agenda relevant for today’s youth, as black youth are
asked to remember their glorious past as kings and queens who ruled over
vast empires, and how people from all over the world came to them to receive
teaching. That is, until Asians, Arabs and Europeans conquered Africa with
gold and military might. He describes how the history of Africa was destroyed
by Alexander the Great, and how a “correct understanding of African history”
could create a new mentality where young black people would abandon their
ghetto attitude.
   The idea of advanced Egyptian science and mysteries has become a recur-
ring theme in Afrocentricity, as has the idea that Europeans stole most of it.
James must be seen as an important source for this. As the use of esoteric
sources has been one of the most recurring criticisms against James, some
Afrocentrists like Molefi Kente Asante try to downplay the esoteric side of
James’s work.31 Esoteric sources are nevertheless quite visible, and spiritual
ideas about the nature of man would also become integrated in Afrocentricity.
James’s work did not have an immediate impact on the black national-
ist movement and remained somewhat obscure for many years. During the
1970s, but especially in the 1990s, there was a revival of his ideas, and they
have since then become a common theme for cultural nationalists. It is not
only ideas about Egypt that have become part of the Stolen Legacy paradigm,
but interpretations of Masonry as well. One who has developed this theme is
Zachary P. Gremillion, who published African Origins of Freemasonry in 2005.
Gremillion is clearly Afrocentric and nationalistic. He connects Masonry with
the Egyptian mysteries (following Martin Delany and George James” theories),
and makes connections to both Prince Hall and the Nation of Islam. He claims
that Elijah Muhammad, leader of the Nation of Islam from 1934 to 1975, was
a Mason and that the teachings of the movement are filled with Masonic
symbolism.32


CULTURAL POLITICS IN THE US

In the 1960s and 1970s we find political groups with eschatological ideas
based on a quest to regain a lost African tradition and mentality. One example
of this is the US Organization, founded in the late 1960s by Maulana Karenga
(b. 1941). US represented “us” as opposed to “them”, symbolizing unity among
black people against external enemies, primarily white people.33 Originally

 31. Asante, An Afrocentric Manifesto, 146.
 32. Gremillion, African Origins of Freemasonry, 250.
 33. Scot Brown, Fighting for US, 38.


                                                                             59
fredrik gregorius



founded by followers of Malcolm X and based on his legacy, the group soon
focused increasingly on Karenga himself, who became a quasi-religious lead-
er.34 A priesthood was established within US to transmit and deepen the
members’ understanding of Karenga’s teachings. Despite its focus on African
culture, the movement was a part of the more ­political Black Power move-
ment, and Karenga, who also pursued an academic career, wrote a disserta-
tion on Afro-American Nationalism in 1976.35 Still, Karenga saw the need
for myths and spirituality and created a system called Kawaida, as a form of
philosophical foundation for US. This is a form of holistic philosophy, based
on his understanding of the basic principles underlying all African societies.36
Central to Kawaida are seven principles, called nguzo saba, that became
something of a creed. These are:

            • Umoja (Unity) To strive for and to maintain unity in the fam-
              ily, community, nation and race.
            • Kujichagulia (Self-Determination) To define ourselves, name
              ourselves, create for ourselves and speak for ourselves.
            • Ujima (Collective Work and Responsibility) To build and
              maintain our community together and make our brothers’ and
              sisters’ problems our problems and to solve them together.
            • Ujamaa (Cooperative Economics) To build and maintain our
              own stores, shops and other businesses and to profit from
              them together.
            • Nia (Purpose) To make our collective vocation the building
              and developing of our community in order to restore our
              people to their traditional greatness.
            • Kuumba (Creativity) To do always as much as we can, in the
              way we can, in order to leave our community more beautiful
              and beneficial than we inherited it.
            • Imani (Faith) To believe with all our heart in our people, our
              parents, our teachers, our leaders and the righteousness and
              victory of our struggle.37

While “spiritual” matters were seen as important, Karenga took a rather neg-
ative view on religion and particularly what he called “spookism” (i.e. belief
in the supernatural). Karenga regarded God as being within the human
being itself. These ideas were probably inspired by the Nation of Islam.38 The
supernatural was an aspect of African culture which Karenga rejected as


 34.   Ibid., 38–9; Austin, Achieving Blackness, 63.
 35.   Karenga, Afro-American Nationalism.
 36.   Scot Brown, Fighting for US, 33–6.
 37.   Karenga, Kwanzaa, 125.
 38.   Austin, Achieving Blackness, 63–4.


60
                                                                            inventing africa



­ etrimental to the position of the black people. Still, religion was of impor-
d
tance as a socially unifying factor, and Karenga created his own year of cel-
ebrations, based on the Black Power struggle, to replace the Christian one.
One of these celebrations, Kwanzaa, became rather successful even outside
the black nationalist movement.39
   After the end of the Black Power era in the 1980s, Karenga wrote more on
spiritual matters. While it would take a while for the complete Egyptomania
that would later define the Afrocentric movement to surface, we can see how
the image of Egypt became more majestic already in Karenga’s writings in the
early 1980s. Still, in his Introduction to Black Studies, Egypt plays a prominent
but hardly central role. Egyptian civilization is regarded as having its origin in
Ethiopia, emphasizing the African foundation of Egypt, and there is mention
of many Western ideas and religious concepts being based on Egyptian myths
and concepts; the virgin birth and the Jesus figure are, for example, said to be
modelled on Isis and Horus. These are, however, not Karenga’s own ideas, but
mainly reflections on other writers.40 There is hardly any focus on mystical
powers or deep spirituality, but rather on the political achievements of Egypt
and their communal aspects. However, his second doctoral dissertation in
1994 was concerned with the moral concept of maat in ancient Egypt,41 and in
his later writings Egypt and its religion would figure as central components.42


AFROCENTRIC SPIRITUALITY

Afrocentricity can be seen as a development of the cultural nationalism of
Maulana Karenga and the Black Power movement.43 While the term itself
came into popular use in the 1980s by Molefi Kente Asante (1942–), it hardly
represents a clear break from older forms of black nationalism. Afrocentricity
has become a controversial movement particularly in academia due to what
critics consider unscientific methods and a racialized view of the world.44
Asante answered some of these critics in one of his latest books, An Afrocentric
Manifesto (2007), but that will hardly make the controversies go away. Asante
has a tendency to dismiss all of his critics, including African-born scholars
like the philosopher Kwame Anthony Appiah, as Eurocentric, thus prevent-
ing any constructive dialogue.45 Afrocentrism is still a visible part of academic

 39. Scot Brown, Fighting for US, 68–70, 161.
 40. Karenga, Introduction to Black Studies, 55–6.
 41. Karenga, Maat, the Moral Ideal in Ancient Egypt.
 42. Karenga, Kwanzaa.
 43. Austin, Achieving Blackness, 130–33.
 44. For a description and analysis of the debate regarding the inclusion of Afrocentricity in
     schools in America, see Binder, Contentious Curricula. For an example of the critique lev-
     elled against Afrocentricity, see Lefkowitz, Not Out of Africa.
 45. Asante, “A Quick Reading of Rhetorical Jingoism”.


                                                                                            61
fredrik gregorius