In this article, I will investigate how Anton Szandor LaVey (1930–97), who
founded the Church of Satan in 1966, constructed a Satanic tradition in his
texts, and to what use he put it.1 James R. Lewis has discussed how Satanists
in the Church of Satan, after LaVey’s death, make reference to tradition.2 In
that context, tradition is basically understood as the teaching established by
their founder. What I shall look at here, however, is rather how LaVey himself
makes ambiguous references to a supposed pre-existing Satanic tradition. I
will present an interpretation of this based on LaVey’s overall ontology, and his
view of religious and esoteric phenomena.
    In an esoteric context, tradition will typically be invoked to provide legiti-
macy, and there are, as Olav Hammer has shown, several ingrained esoteri-
cist strategies for doing this.3 Naturally, use of tradition as a means to create
legitimacy is not the exclusive domain of esotericism or religion. Nations,
universities, companies and so on use this strategy frequently. But several of
LaVey’s strategies for employing tradition harken back to approaches preva-
lent in Western esotericism, and are instantly recognizable to a scholar of such
ideas. As will be shown, he both utilizes historical predecessors in a way that
is common within Western esotericism in general, and breaks with this com-
mon usage in a way similar to what we can observe among Chaos Magicians.4


   1. Satanic tradition, rather than Satanist tradition, is the more common emic term, which I
      shall also use here. For further discussion of themes similar to those treated in this chapter,
      see Petersen, “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”.
   2. Lewis, Legitimating New Religions, 103–22.
   3. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge. On the creation of legitimacy using tradition in a Satanist
      group (the Denmark-based Neo-Luciferian Church), see Faxneld, “The Strange Case of Ben
      Kadosh”, 13–21.
   4. See Chapter 5 of the present volume.



72
                                                   secret lineages and de facto satanists



   LaVey discarded much of the old esoteric and Satanic material as useless
and outdated, but he still emerges as dependent on it to a fairly large extent.
This applies not only in the general sense that no creed is of course created
ex nihilo, but also because LaVey explicitly calls on tradition to legitimate
and, more importantly, playfully create the right atmosphere for his Satanic
activities. I shall argue in this article that legitimation is not, as perhaps would
be expected, the prime function of tradition for LaVey. Rather, he seems to
deem tradition most useful for bringing about certain psychological effects in
a framework where one practises the “willing suspension of disbelief ” (to use
the term coined by Coleridge) in a limited context.
   I will focus almost exclusively on core movement texts, with some addi-
tional data from an interview I recently conducted with the current High
Priest of the Church of Satan, Peter H. Gilmore, and occasional references to
material on the Church of Satan’s website. In order to get a more complete
view of the theme discussed here, it would be necessary to also talk to a great
number of Church of Satan members and study views concerning tradition
expressed on various Satanist Internet forums. What is presented here should
therefore be considered groundwork for such a larger study, which would
also take more into account the enactment and actual use of tradition among
Satanists.
   The material for this article is primarily LaVey’s two main works, The Satanic
Bible (1969) and The Satanic Rituals (1972), and to some extent his two collec-
tions of essays The Devil’s Notebook (1992) and Satan Speaks! (1998). The two
books The Secret Life of a Satanist: The Authorized Biography of Anton LaVey
(1990) and The Church of Satan (1990), both by Blanche Barton, who would
later give birth to LaVey’s son, will also be scrutinized to see how tradition is
constructed. When it comes to some of LaVey’s works, the question of author-
ship is not uncomplicated. As is well known, The Satanic Bible contains a pro-
logue borrowed from Ragnar Redbeard.5 Michael Aquino wrote some sections
in The Satanic Rituals, and it has been claimed that Diane Hegarty, LaVey’s
partner from 1960 to 1985, also contributed to his early texts.6 For the present
article, I shall leave these questions aside and treat all LaVey’s works as writ-
ten solely by him. Most readers will approach them as stemming straight from
his pen, and this is perhaps more important in the end. Further, even if others
may have ­contributed, LaVey edited their contributions and fitted them into
his framework, thus making the end result “his” in all relevant senses.7



   5. Lewis, Legitimating New Religions, 112.
   6. Aquino, The Church of Satan, 52, 691. Aquino’s history of the church is a treasure trove of
      information, but must be read with awareness of his falling out with LaVey.
   7. Concerning the composing of The Satanic Bible and LaVey’s use of passages by other
      authors, see Gallagher, “Sources, Sects and Scripture”.



                                                                                              73
per faxneld



HOW OLD IS SATANISM?

Having specialized in the early history of Satanism, I often get the question
“How old is Satanism?” It seems appropriate to begin a chapter about Satanism
and tradition by briefly answering this query, as it provides a necessary back-
ground for the main discussion. If we understand the question as pertaining to
how long there has been an unbroken explicitly Satanic tradition, in the sense
of a group of people adhering to a teaching of that type, the answer is quite
simple: an enduring tradition of Satanism was initiated in 1966, when Anton
LaVey founded the Church of Satan.
    The answer can be problematized in various ways, of course. First off, defi-
nitions of Satanism and tradition need to be considered. In this section of the
article I will use a fairly broad definition of Satanism, where the term desig-
nates any more systematic and sustained celebration of Satan, as a symbolical
or actually existing figure.8 A tradition, in turn, is here understood to be a set
of more or less distinct ideas kept continuously alive by persons over a period
of time spanning at least several decades.9
    Even if no one prior to 1966 inaugurated a tradition that remains in exist-
ence to this day, there were people who nourished an intense sympathy for the
Devil long before LaVey. As early as the late eighteenth century we can find
purely literary Satanists, but their sympathy for the Devil seldom extended
beyond occasional outbursts of lauding Lucifer in a text or two.10 One excep-
tion is the Polish Decadent author Stanislaw Przybyszewski (1868–1927),
who both openly referred to himself as a Satanist and developed a Satanic
Weltanschauung through a series of works in different genres (novels, short
stories, essays in history, art criticism). He could be said to be the first “proper”
Satanist, as his literary exploration of such sympathies also resulted in a spe-
cific and lasting view of the world with Satan as its root metaphor.11 In the
context of Western esotericism, one of the first to express unequivocal praise
of Satan was H. P. Blavatsky, cofounder and front figure of the Theosophical
Society, in her magnum opus The Secret Doctrine (1888). If her system is con-
sidered as a whole, however, these ideas are peripheral.12 The first person
to build an entire esoteric system around Satan, though ­admittedly a rather


   8. This is basically the same definition proposed in Faxneld, Mörkrets Apostlar, xiv–xvi.
   9. But see the discussion by Asprem and Granholm in Chapter 2 of this volume.
 10. As Peter Schock has shown, the English Romantics often labelled the “Satanic School” –
      Byron and Shelley – were a lot more equivocal in their praise of Satan than is sometimes
      assumed (and this goes for William Blake as well). Their attitude to Lucifer shifted through-
      out their careers, and they also employed him as a symbol of wickedness on numerous
      occasions (Schock, Romantic Satanism).
 11. On Przybyszewski’s Satanism, see Faxneld, “Witches, Nihilist Anarchism and Social
      Darwinism”; Faxneld, Mörkrets Apostlar, 140–49. The standard biography is Klim,
      Stanislaw Przybyszewski.
 12. Faxneld, Mörkrets Apostlar, 108–17.


74
                                                  secret lineages and de facto satanists