that ­illustrates the distinct and conflicting parameters each interpretation
establishes for what is to be considered definitive for “Deep Ecology”.
   The considerable variance between the three main interpretations of Deep
Ecology manifests in each possessing a different esoteric truth-claim. As a
result, the problem that this chapter confronts concerns how the confusion
over defining Deep Ecology extends into determining the place of esoteric ele-
ments in the milieu; esoteric discourses that are grounded in one particular
definition are not seen as legitimate expressions of Deep Ecology according
to the other definitions. Moreover, the esoteric discourses that have come to
be embedded in the milieu, of which there are many, often draw upon the
esoteric aspects of the three most prominent interpretations of Deep Ecology
without acknowledging the significant differences between them. Accordingly,
Deep Ecology must be understood as a number of divergent and overlap-
ping claims, which, in turn, diverge from and overlap with esoteric and non-­
esoteric discourses alike. In order to underscore this crucial point, this chapter
will use the graphical designation “DE” to refer not to a particular interpreta-
tion of Deep Ecology, but to the field of discourse that is referenced when the
term Deep Ecology is used.2 This is done so as to avoid unintentionally validat-
ing any interpretation of Deep Ecology above another and to stress the inher-
ent plurality of such a field. Put differently, DE is the palimpsest formed by the
various agents who assert their axiomatic claims on higher knowledge and the
ways in which access to such knowledge create, organize, and perpetuate the
social realities that compose DE as a discursive field. Betwixt and between, the
esoteric elements in DE must be understood as idiosyncratic interpretations
of particular definitions of Deep Ecology, that is to say, neither as odd pieces of
esoteric flotsam nor wholly representative of the milieu.3


THE HISTORY OF DEEP ECOLOGY

The neologism “Deep Ecology” first appeared in a paper entitled “The Shallow
and the Deep, Long Range Ecology Movement” delivered at the Third World
Future Research Conference in Bucharest in 1972. In this groundbreaking
paper, the celebrated Norwegian philosopher Arne Dekke Eide Naess pro-
posed a polemical typology for environmentalism that posited a “deep ecology
movement” over and against a “shallow ecology movement”. While acknowl-
edging that both sides were invested in stemming environmental destruction,
Naess insisted that their vastly differing rationale, aims and conclusions con-
stituted two separate movements, and thus necessitated a categorical division.

   2. The concept of DE is largely informed by Colin Campbell’s concept of the “cultic milieu”.
      See Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and Secularization”; Bron Taylor, Dark Green
      Religion, 14.
   3. Albanese, Nature Religion in America, 6.


288
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



   In his paper, Naess dismissively summed up the entirety of the shallow ecol-
ogy movement in two curt sentences: “Fight against pollution and resource
depletion. Central objective: the health and affluence of people in the devel-
oped countries.”4 The two impulses that Naess identified at the heart of this
approach were anthropocentrism and the drive to maintain the technological-
industrial status quo. Similar to contemporary criticisms that refer to “green
washing”, Naess’s typology made clear that any environmental ethic that put
the needs of humans before those of non-human nature was not only shal-
low in terms of both its diagnosis and conclusions, but altogether insufficient.
Being in favour of the deep approach, Naess used the platform afforded to him
in Bucharest to enumerate seven “vague generalizations” that, to him, char-
acterized the “long-range Deep Ecology movement”.5 Briefly stated, the seven
generalizations were:

    • an ontological worldview described as a “[r]ejection of the man-in-­
      environment image in favour of the relational, total-field image”;
    • ecospherical egalitarianism which imprecisely became synonymous in
      DE with “nonanthropocentrism”;
    • diversitarianism;
    • an anti-class posture;
    • ending resource depletion and pollution by targeting their root causes
      and not “shallow quick-fixes”;
    • complexity understood in terms of a gestalt, and not in terms of a lack of
      such a unifying principle; and
    • “local autonomy and decentralization”.6

Naess concluded his paper by laying out three methodological points that
governed his list of seven descriptive points. The first point was that the list
was composed of normative values not derived from the science of ecology,
but instead “suggested, inspired, and fortified by the ecological knowledge and
the lifestyle of the ecological field-worker”.7 The second point reaffirmed the
“forcefully normative” nature of the seven points, which he hoped would be
“freely used and elaborated” to describe the Deep Ecology movement.8 The
last point stressed that the seven points he outlined represented a unified
framework of ecological philosophy, which he termed an “ecosophy”, and that
by extension, the Deep Ecology movement was “long range” in that it served
as an aggregate of numerous idiosyncratic ecosophies, with Aldo Leopold’s


   4.   Naess, “The Shallow and the Deep, Long-Range Ecology Movements”, 154.
   5.   Ibid., 151.
   6.   Ibid., 152.
   7.   Ibid., 154.
   8.   Ibid., 154.


                                                                                 289
joseph christian greer



biocentric “land ethic” and Rachel Carson’s mystical “sea-ethic” standing as
early exemplars.9
   Naess’s foundational paper provides a point of departure for tracking the
ways in which supporters, critics and commentators would expand, reinter-
pret, and depart from the term’s initial meaning and in so doing enlarge the
discursive field of DE. In terms of historical context, DE’s discursive expan-
sion can be attributed to two American scholars, philosophy professor George
Sessions and sociologist Bill Devall, who undertook a determined effort to use
Naess’s typology both in their work and in critiquing the eco-­philosophies
of others.10 Along with disseminating and popularizing Naess’s work in arti-
cles and the book they co-wrote entitled Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature
Mattered, Sessions and Devall also developed the typology beyond its descrip-
tive function by interpreting Deep Ecology as a solidified position largely
based on the ontological propositions of Naess’s own personal ecosophy as
outlined in his Bucharest paper.11 As Deep Ecology historian Warwick Fox
notes, their efforts paid off, so much so that by February 1983 eco-­philosopher
John Passmore could confidently write, “it is now customary to divide the
family of ‘ecophilosophers’ … into two genera, the ‘shallow’ and the ‘deep’”.12
In 1985 Sessions and Naess co-authored and published the “Deep Ecology
Manifesto”, thereby adding another interpretive level to the seemingly distinct,
yet increasingly complicated phenomenon.
   The creation of a manifesto was a watershed in DE. Sessions and Devall
– as well as a host of North American supporters, including Alan Drengson,
the first editor of Deep Ecology’s flagship journal The Trumpeter – were quick
to refer to it, and not Naess’s Bucharest paper, as the definitive statement on
Deep Ecology. At the same time, a handful of scholars began to focus on how
Naess’s ontology ran like a red thread through the elaborations Sessions and
Devall (as well as Drengson) made with regard to defining Deep Ecology.
Critics including David Rothenberg, Andrew Light and Eric Katz all argued

   9. Naess uses Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring to date the beginnings of the international Deep
      Ecology movement, which is an overlooked but important link for the scholars who write
      Thoreau and Emerson, and American Transcendental in general, into Deep Ecology’s his-
      tory. For examples of this dating see Sessions, “Wildness, Cyborgs, and Our Ecological
      Future”, 148; Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 4; Naess, “Deepness of Questions and
      the Deep Ecology Movement”, 208. For Carson’s connection to Thoreau in particular see
      Brooks, The House of Life, 5–8.
 10. Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 43–77.
 11. Ibid., 233–6. Written in 1985 by Sessions and Devall, the first Deep Ecology book, entitled
      Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature Mattered, takes the seven points particular to Naess’s
      ecosophy as normative in the philosophy of Deep Ecology. Due to the pressure of critics,
      they later recanted these philosophical associations and the text in general, describing the
      instances where they conflated Ecosophy T and Deep Ecology as “serious flaws”. For explicit
      examples of these “flaws” see Devall & Sessions, Deep Ecology, 66–7, and for their retrac-
      tion see Sessions, “Preface”, xiv.
 12. Passmore, quoted in Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 69.


290
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism