there are other methods of more literal mind control, which Marrs relates to
the heritage from Nazi scientists, through CIA experiments, and beyond. He
mainly presents these techniques as being used on a few individuals rather
than on whole populations,83 but there is one exception ringing of Cold War
fears. This is when he presents the fluoridation of water as part of the Nazi
heritage of mind control, and alleges that “sodium fluoride was placed in the
drinking water of Nazi concentration camps to keep inmates pacified and sus-
ceptible to external control”.84 Since he also alleges that fluoridation gives peo-
ple cancer and other life-threatening diseases, it becomes a general threat.
   While Marrs’s main interest may lie with politics and economy as elements
of limiting the free agency of the ordinary citizen, this does not preclude a
very distinct interest in religion. Marrs, like Icke, devotes quite a lot of space
to presenting alternative histories of religion. Like Icke, he follows “New Age”
versions that repackage the Judaeo-Christian tradition as something quite dif-
ferent from how it is usually understood. But more than anything, he holds a
continued interest in secret societies and, like Icke, sees a “Babylonian” herit-
age behind the current world conspiracy. This includes, as one might expect,
the involvement of secret societies in greater and lesser event conspiracies.
For instance, “World War II was largely the result of infighting between
secret occult societies composed of wealthy businessmen on both sides of
the Atlantic.”85 Although each event is traced to particular causes, they share
a general trait: “The imprint of secret societies can be found in every war and
conflict of the twentieth century.”86
   Like the Discordian pranksters, Marrs is enamoured with the Illuminati.
So is an enormous amount of conspiracy culture, and like some of it, Marrs
takes the “information” presented in the Illuminatus! trilogy at face value. He
buys into their fake sources and historiography, for instance attributing to the
historical Illuminati the prescience and/or influence to coin “flower power” (in
the form “Ewige Blumenkraft”) as slogan. When tracing their prehistory, how-
ever, he stops at a lineage back to “the infamous Muslim Assassins”,87 while its
present history is connected to “the Round Tables of Mason Cecil Rhodes …
the Royal Institute of International Affairs, Council of Foreign Relations, the
Trilateral Commission”88 – in short, all the usual suspects. As with Icke and
other (il)luminaries of conspiracy culture, Marrs is interested in the “blood-
lines” of this hidden elite, tracing their genealogical descent as well as their
ideas and (abuse of ) power through history. He finds that “[t]he world’s deep-
est secrets all lead back to Sumer in Mesopotamia, the first known great


 83.   E.g. Marrs, The Rise of the Fourth Reich, 346–8.
 84.   Ibid., 329.
 85.   Ibid., 305.
 86.   Marrs, Rule by Secrecy, 200.
 87.   Ibid., 237.
 88.   Ibid., 109.


                                                                                      217
asbjørn dyrendal



civilization”.89 Why them, why there? It was a prime, first site of extraterrestrial
operations on earth, explains Marrs, seeking this space because it combined
water, fuel and moderate weather.90
   The historical narrative of Rule by Secrecy is jumbled. The origin with the
extraterrestrial “Annunaki” is presented as a climax at the end of the book.
Every chapter in itself deals with single strands of historical claims that may or
may not be dealt with or linked to in other chapters. Continuity is underdevel-
oped. This may be the narrator’s choice, but it also points towards the way his
knowledge-claims are developed in the text. “There is no guarantee”, he starts
out with what seems a massive understatement, “that all of the information
presented here is absolute ground truth.”91 With a powerful conspiracy trying
to suppress knowledge and supply misleading evidence, anything is doubtful.92
As is common to grand conspiracy, this is not a call for extra careful consid-
eration of sources of information. Instead it serves to make the case for a lib-
eral, more “esoteric” approach to the production of knowledge. The doubt and
uncertainty presented at the outset is rarely seen again.
   How then is knowledge produced? Two of the central strategies could be
called innuendo and superficial resemblance. Coale comments that “Marrs
weaves his web of guilt by association”,93 and all of the elements are impor-
tant. Lists, names and connections produce hidden meanings. The links may
be personal, or they may relate to ideas, with the latter being constructed as
proof of personal contact. When important people need to be associated, the
text may for instance delineate the possible links between degrees of separa-
tion. This results in a maze of small narratives about association. Similarity is
often conferred on the basis of the conspiracy lore and alternative histories
the theorist depends on. Such similarities may, as with Icke, be used to bridge
even longer historical spans and conflate demonized enemies in conspiracy
lore. A relatively short time span, with a useful gallery of persons, is bridged
like this, for example:

        Marx’s manifesto set forth the ten immediate steps to create
        an ideal communist state. They bear a striking similarity to the
        Protocols of the Learned Elders of Zion, suggesting some common
        origin. … This list was also remarkably similar to the steps for cre-
        ating an ideal society proposed by the Bavarian Illuminati, strongly
        indicating a close connection between the two.94


 89.   Ibid., 374.
 90.   Ibid., 381.
 91.   Ibid., 17.
 92.   Ibid.
 93.   Coale, Paradigms of Paranoia, 23.
 94.   Marrs, Rule by Secrecy, 199.



218
                                                 hidden knowledge , hidden powers



Since the conspiracy is a web of relations, and everything is shrouded in
secrets, the proof is in the linking. When the link may be made, it serves as
proof. These forms of link may take the form of correspondences less intelligi-
ble to anyone versed in the requisite area of knowledge:

       The famous Egyptian Book of the dead, in a passage containing
       a confession to the “Lord of Righteousness”, reveals a remarkable
       correlation to the Ten Commandments of the Old Testament.

       Bible                               Book of the Dead
       Have no other gods before me	I do not temper with divine
                                           balance
       Make no idols	I stop not a god when he comes
                                           forth
       Do not misuse the name of God	I do not offend the god who is
                                           at the helm
       …
       This comparison provided compelling support for those who claim
       that the biblical Israelites drew heavily from the ancient Egyptian
       texts. The Egyptians, in turn, gained their knowledge and beliefs
       from the older cultures of Babylon and Sumer.95

Perceived similarities are proofs of contacts, influences and, finally, identity. If
you cannot find the time to produce even the spurious similarities to “prove”
the connections, you may, as we see exemplified in the final sentence, just pos-
tulate them.
   All strategies of producing links and similarities have, however, another
element tied to them. Like Icke, Marrs depends on the “research” of others
not duped by the conspiracy; the research of someone in the same milieu.
References to more mainstream academic endeavours are few and tied
chiefly to results that may be fitted into the narrative being weaved. Although
unnamed “researchers” abound, there are surprisingly few references to the
common topos of mainstream scientists being shut up and having their results
suppressed by the conspiracy. Still, the topic of the conspiratorial suppression
of knowledge is always in place. Indeed, it plays a central role as what limits
freedom and “salvation”. Information (“the truth”), Marrs concludes, is what
will set you free.96




 95. Ibid., 365.
 96. Ibid., 410.



                                                                                219
asbjørn dyrendal



DISCUSSION: CONSPIRACY THEORY AS ESOTERIC DISCOURSE?