definitions – such as the one introduced by Antoine Faivre, which dominated
the field in the 1990s – and instead adopted more inclusive perspectives. In
this book we can see the coexistence of three main theoretical approaches
that have all emerged during approximately the last half decade. Together they
could be considered the groundwork for something of a “new paradigm” in the
study of the esoteric in Western culture. Named after their main spokesper-
sons, these are:

  1. The von Stuckrad approach. Here the esoteric is used as an analytical
     tool, consciously constructed by the scholar to investigate processes of
     identity formation on the broader European religious and cultural field.
     “The esoteric” becomes an instrument by which one can avoid the largely
     untenable focus on more or less monolithic “traditions”, which seemingly
     overshadow smaller developments, and instead examine the inherent
     pluralism of European religious and cultural history. In von Stuckrad’s
     application, the esoteric is construed to focus on discourses concerned
     with the “secretive dialectic of concealment and revelation” and “perfect
     knowledge”,30 regardless of which cultural fields these discourses might
     show up in.
  2. The Hanegraaff approach. As above, the focus is not on the esoteric
     “in itself ”. Instead of stipulating an analytical construct, the focus is on
     the complex historical processes which have themselves constructed
     and created the notion of “the esoteric” in Western culture. Import­
     ant to this “constructionist” approach are certain polemical processes
     grounded in the Reformation and the Enlightenment projects, whereby
     certain phenomena have been marginalized as “rejected knowledge”, and
     thus become the source for later constructions of “esoteric” and “occult
     tradition”, and later for the study of esotericism itself. As with the von
     Stuckrad approach, this perspective can be used to shine light on the
     complexities of European cultural and religious history which have typi-
     cally remained veiled in earlier approaches.
  3. The Partridge approach. In this approach, the focus is on contemporary
     processes of cultural and religious change. Designed to analyse religious
     expression in the present day rather than in distant historical periods,
     the approach looks at how previously marginalized phenomena and
     notions get popularized, and how the esoteric functions as part of an
     occultural reservoir – operating mainly through popular culture – which
     is used to construct beliefs, practices and identities. In this, the Partridge
     approach is strongly embedded in social scientific theory and method,
     whereas the previous ones are grounded in discourse theory and strict
     historiographical research respectively.


30. von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe, 67.


                                                                                     23
egil asprem and kennet granholm



All three approaches derive from the mid-2000s. Von Stuckrad first presented
his model in the article “Western Esotericism: Towards an Integrative Model
of Interpretation” in 2005.31 Hanegraaff presented his in the article “Forbidden
Knowledge: Anti-Esoteric Polemics and Academic Research”, also in 2005,
which was further developed in a couple of articles32 before finding full
expression in the book Esotericism and the Academy (2012). Partridge’s model
is presented in his two-volume The Re-enchantment of the West in 2004/5.33
All three explore novel ­theoretical and ­methodological avenues, opening up
the study of the esoteric not only to religious studies, but also to other fields
in the humanities and social sciences, thus providing, as the contributions in
this volume demonstrate, broad analytical application. Furthermore, all three
approaches steer away from providing a conventional substantial definition of
the esoteric, instead going for more fluid and open-ended perspectives. This
is also why the three approaches do not seem to clash, but rather complement
one another, dealing with different areas and having different, though com-
patible, applications. It is in this “new paradigm”, polyvalent and open-ended,
as demonstrated in this volume, that the study of the esoteric has its greatest
potential of contributing to and combining with other broader fields of schol-
arly inquiry.




 31. See also von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe; von
     Stuckrad, Western Esotericism.
 32. See Hanegraaff, “The Trouble with Images”; Hanegraaff, “The Birth of Esotericism from the
     Spirit of Protestantism”.
 33. See also Chapter 6 in the present volume.


24
chapter 2

CONSTRUCTING ESOTERICISMS
SOCIOLOGICAL, HISTORICAL AND CRITICAL APPROACHES
TO THE INVENTION OF TRADITION

Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm



         [N]ovelty is no less novel for being able to dress up easily as
         antiquity.1

“Esotericism” is often linked with “tradition”. References to “hidden” or “peren-
nial” traditions abound on the emic level, and often enough esotericism has
itself been conceived of as constituting a “tradition” traceable through history.
These two general tendencies hide a web of interrelated questions, which can
be probed from the perspectives of sociology and history. In the present chap-
ter, we chart some of the most important of these, aiming at a comprehensive
overview of the problems surrounding the notion of “tradition” in the field of
esotericism and pointing at ways to deal with them.
   Our approach is therefore synthetic, and ploughs through several lay-
ers of discussions. First, we discuss briefly the vague and problematic uses
to which the term tradition is often put. This brings us to a discussion of
attempts to operationalize the term in the context of sociology. We generally
find that a lack of historical awareness is detrimental to sociological uses of
“tradition”/”traditional”, although the more nuanced notion of “detraditionali-
zation” and attendant processes does have some promise. After pointing out
shortcomings of these conceptualizations of tradition, we turn to a critical
constructivist approach emphasizing the inventedness of traditions. Drawing
on the approach pioneered by Eric Hobsbawm,2 and the applications of similar
approaches to religion by Olav Hammer and James Lewis,3 and to esotericism
by Hammer,4 we recognize its strong critical potential and call for more sys-
tematic scrutiny of the social, material, contextual and situated background

   1.   Hobsbawm, “Introduction”, 5.
   2.   Hobsbawm & Ranger, The Invention of Tradition.
   3.   Lewis & Hammer, The Invention of Sacred Tradition.
   4.   Hammer, Claiming Knowledge.


                                                                              25
egil asprem and kennet granholm



of the construction and claim of tradition in esoteric discourses. Moving then
from “etic” discussions of the application of concepts to the “emic” level, we
review Wouter J. Hanegraaff ’s recent work5 on the formation of “esotericism”
from changing discourses on knowledge and truth in European history, and
draw out some implications for the study of tradition. As Hanegraaff also
argues, the thesis has consequences for assessing the way scholars have con-
strued their object of study in the twentieth century. We go on to discuss how
the notion of an “esoteric/occult tradition” may in fact be seen as the result of
these prior constructions of “ancient wisdom narratives” and their uses (pro
and contra), sometimes with the overtones of perennialism still intact. These
discussions culminate in a case study which emphasizes the co-production of
tradition by scholars and practitioners: the construction of “shamanism” as a
category by nationalistically driven folklorists, “religionist” historians of reli-
gions and anthropologists “gone native”.
   This is, however, not the only way in which scholars take part in construc-
tion. Focusing also on those who have had no intention or desire to found new
religious trends, and even been explicitly adverse to the idea, we argue that the
very existence of our field and our strategic uses of terms such as “esotericism”
in particular have facilitated, through grateful reception among practition-
ers, a process by which “esotericism” is becoming an object in a sense which it
arguably was not before. Finally, we round off our series of discussions by tak-
ing a final look at the role of fiction and popular culture in constructing tradi-
tion. Together, these latter points (the role of scholarship, fiction, and popular
culture) mark out particularly important areas for the construction of tradi-
tions in contemporary esotericism.


THE MANY FACES OF TRADITION

The term “tradition” has been associated with a large number of different
meanings in both common speech and specialist literature. A plurality of con-
ceptualizations of tradition exists in scholarly circles, often bound up in spe-
cific disciplinary concerns and preferences. Starting with conceptualizations
closest to general dictionary understandings, “tradition” can be described as:

      [A]nything which is transmitted or handed down from the past to
      the present … [including] all that a society of a given time pos-
      sesses and which already existed when its present possessors came
      upon it and which is not solely the product of physical processes in
      the external world or exclusively the result of ecological and physi-
      ological necessity.6

   5. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy.
   6. Shils, Tradition, 12.


26
                                                                     constructing esotericisms