Since its emergence, the Internet has been used for religious purposes. The
Pew Internet and American Life report for 2001 states that a quarter of the
Americans who had access to the Internet used it for religious purposes, often
information searching, accessing religious material or connecting to others of
the same faith.40 In a similar report in 2004 this number had increased to 64
per cent.41 There can be no doubt that for many, the Internet is a place where
religion is alive and flourishing. Indeed, as Lorne L. Dawson notes, “Religion of
every kind, big and small, old and new, mainstream and more exotic, is present
online, and in great abundance.”42 Not surprisingly, this includes those who
practise esoteric religions. In fact, as Stef Aupers remarks, recent studies have
found that neopagans are more active on the Internet than any other religious
group.43 Yet, being so active on the Internet has its challenges. Coming from
a relatively new and individualistic religion, neopagans are not averse to reli-
gious experimentation and change. Indeed, they are willing to take traditional
forms of practice and adapt them for online use. As Dawson and Douglas
Cowan note, “when covens go online – when they become ‘cybercovens’ …
the notion of a coven [becomes] considerably more elastic”.44 Nonetheless,
having the coven online is central to the religious practice of many neopagans.
Community is the focus of many people who use the Internet for religious
purposes. This communal orientation derives from the social networking
aspect where the members do not just create individual social connections,
but large social webs of interaction.45 Within the neopagan community, these
cybercovens act as places where large social networks emerge, but still within
boundaries. It is this boundary that psychologically contributes to the partici-
pants understanding of the cybercoven as a sacred space, even if the interac-
tion is through a website or online message boards.46 It is not only neopagans
that view online community as fitting into their esoteric religious worldview.
As Brown writes about the New Age channelling community:

       The problem of Internet-based community, however, is that it is
       both specialized and diluted. “Probably the first thing anybody
       notices when they go online,” writes another believer in the Net’s
       social magic, “is the community-building taking place all through
       cyberspace”.47


 40. Larsen, CyberFaith. For more discussion on this, see Chapter 7 of the present volume.
 41. Clark et al., Faith Online.
 42. Dawson, “The Mediation of Religious Experience in Cyberspace”, 15.
 43. Aupers, “‘Where the Zeros Meet the Ones’”, 221.
 44. Dawson & Cowan, Religion Online, 2. See also Cowan, Cyberhenge, chapter 4, where he dis-
     cusses cybercovens in depth.
 45. Heidi Campbell, Exploring Religious Community Online, 41.
 46. Cowan, Cyberhenge, 144.
 47. Michael F. Brown, The Channeling Zone, 125.


170
                                    accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



Brown continues by mentioning the way the community “consists of a shared
identity rather than an enduring commitment to a circle of neighbors and
kin”.48 This is central to social networking with groups that practice esoteric
religion. Because their numbers are few and they are geographically scattered,
the Internet acts as a way for individuals to create affinity communities with
others who share the same interests and beliefs. Indeed, this is one of the pri-
mary reasons why many cybercovens were created, to overcome geographic
isolation of many solitary neopagans.49 Nevertheless, there are still significant
barriers to creating a community through text and static images. While one
may feel an affinity with those who share the same chat group or discussion
board, the episodic interaction requires one to revisit frequently to see replies.
While one may feel a sort of presence from the website that feeling can only
get members so close. This is a barrier some have tried to overcome.


ADDING THREE DIMENSIONS AND EMBODIMENT TO
VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS AND WORLDS

As mentioned previously, Erik Davis’s “Technopagans” essay frequently refers
to cyberspace in terms similar to the astral plane. This is also the case of many
others in the neopagan community. Cowan quotes Lisa McSherry as writing
that cyberspace is “a technological doorway to the astral plane”.50 Yet, as he
continues:

        The hyperbole and exaggerated rhetoric in which so many claims
        for the power of the Internet seem to come cloaked is met by the
        reality that we are all ineluctably embodied, subject to the con-
        straints of time and space, and that our ability to interact online is
        hardly a global phenomenon.51

This embodied state is a challenge to all those who wish to create community
in cyberspace. The difficulty is that the medium of text and static graphics does
not create an immersive experience. To meet this need, many have turned
to three-dimensional virtual environments. One of the technopagans Davis
interviewed, Mark Pesce, was on the forefront of meeting this challenge as he
helped develop one of the first three-dimensional modelling languages used
on the Internet. Called VRML (Virtual Reality Modeling Language), this lan-
guage, developed in the mid-1990s, was one of the attempts to move beyond
text and static images towards three-dimensional realms. However, the results

 48.   Ibid.
 49.   Cowan, Cyberhenge, 83–90.
 50.   Ibid., 1.
 51.   Ibid., 3.


                                                                                 171
john l . crow



were very rudimentary and it has taken many years before computer graphics
and computational abilities have allowed wide adoption of convincing three-
dimensional realms. Gordon Calleja traces the evolution of virtual worlds
and environments leading to modern, sophisticated systems.52 Building on
the graduate work of Lisbeth Klastrup, he makes the important distinction
between a virtual world and a virtual environment: “Virtual environments
are computer generated domains which create a perception of space and per-
mit modification through the exertion of agency.”53 These environments are
then encapsulated in virtual worlds, which are “composite assemblages of per-
sistent, multi-user virtual environments extending over a vast geographical
expanse”.54 The distinction becomes one of agency. In virtual environments,
the individual can exert agency to manipulate the environment, whereas
on websites and discussion boards this type of manipulation is precluded.
Secondly, the virtual world is a persistent, multi-user collection where virtual
environments overlap creating a polyvalent system of interaction where each
individual’s action becomes part of the environment for others.
   Moving beyond websites with virtual reality dimensions as originally cre-
ated by Pesce and others utilizing VRML technologies, Calleja traces the evo-
lution of three-dimensional multi-user environments and worlds through
text-based MUDs (multi-user domains/dimensions/dungeons) to sophisti-
cated three-dimensional graphic realms. Beginning with MUDs, text-only
environments with lists indicated the presence of others, and then moving
towards more sophisticated systems with graphics and the ability to interact
with others simultaneously, Calleja discusses MMOGs (massively multiplayer
online games). These online games, accessed through commercial software,
evolved on the Internet and attracted millions of players worldwide. While
these virtual worlds were designed with episodic goals requiring collaboration,
many players found other uses for the system. In MMOGs and MMORPGs
(massively multiplayer online role-playing games), like World of Warcraft, par-
ticipants look for information, help each other, or socialize via text and voice
chat.55 In this way they often foster small communities. However, these virtual
worlds impose teleology; one generally plays to win the game.
   One example of a virtual world without teleology is Second Life. This is a
three-dimensional virtual world where individuals are free to purchase ­digital
property and supplies, build whatever they want, and travel wherever they
like. The virtual world embodies participants with customizable avatars that
allow changing of the skin, hair and eye colours, gender, clothes, and more.
This ability to alter the appearance of the avatar is significant since, Craig D.
Murray and Judith Sixsmith argue, participants in virtual worlds bring their

 52.   Calleja, “Virtual Worlds Today”.
 53.   Ibid., 14.
 54.   Ibid., 15.
 55.   Subrahmanyam & Greenfield, “Online Communication and Adolescent Relationships”, 122.


172
                                         accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



notions of race, gender, ethnicity and culture into the virtual.56 Moreover,
participants understand the virtual environment from their own embodied
perspective.

        By drawing on our evolutionary history, VR [virtual reality] has
        allowed our embodied reality to map onto our embodied experi-
        ences in cyberspace. … the point of projection is at standing height.
        The perspective offered to viewers mimics their experience in the
        world, and viewers measure objects in the virtual environments as
        they do in reality – that is, against their own bodies.57