20. Hill & Thornley, Principia Discordia, 49.
 21. Ibid., 61.
 22. There is some confusion over the exact publication dates for these volumes and it arises
     out of a problem that is being faced more often. The electronic editions (available as PDF
     files on the author’s website) of volume II and III claim that the original paper versions were
     published in 1989, whereas volume I claims a copyright from 1986. However, the author’s
     website lists volume I and II as being published in 1989 and volume III in 1990. 1986 is a
     little early for the first volume to have been produced, so it seems to be a mistake in the
     electronic version. This chapter will take 1989–90 as the years of original publication for
     the three volumes.


96
                                                             perennialism and iconoclasm



1980s and 1990s, publications23 like Chaos International, The Lamp of Thoth
and NOX were some of the main vehicles for debates between practitioners.
Articles in these publications addressed a wide range of subjects. For exam-
ple, the first issue of Chaos International contains some descriptions of ritu-
als, articles about the theory of magic, a piece on the role of women in magic,
and three computer programs designed for gematria.24 Joel Biroco’s KAOS
magazine25 was also a major vehicle for debates on Chaos Magick and this
will be considered below. A major problem in researching these publications
is access, particularly to those that were published in pamphlet form, as they
are generally in the hands of private collectors. Another issue is bibliographic
detail. Some of these publications were republished at different times and
given new publication dates. Others were published with issue numbers to
give the impression that the publication had been in print for longer than it
actually had. For this reason, this chapter will be using sources that are acces-
sible to and verifiable by any interested party. That is to say, the texts used here
are representative simply because they have been the most pervasive, success-
ful texts, and therefore have been the first texts encountered by interested par-
ties seeking to learn about Chaos Magick. This does not mean that the other
kinds of texts mentioned earlier are not important. Any future detailed his-
torical analysis of Chaos Magick will need to have access to them, but for the
purposes of this chapter the sources available are sufficient.


THE APPEAL TO TRADITION

In Claiming Knowledge, Olav Hammer devotes a substantial section to the
legitimizing strategy of the appeal to tradition in post-Enlightenment eso-
tericism. Some of his ideas will prove useful when talking about strategies of
legitimacy for Chaos Magick. In his section on “source amnesia”, he states that
“[t]he latest innovation and the ageless tradition are perceived to be essen-
tially the same.”26 This is in reference to strategies used for the construction
of tradition in various forms of Theosophical and post-Theosophical esoteri-
cism (including twentieth-century occultism) or what he terms the “Modern
Esoteric Tradition”. However, it will be shown in the following sections that
different appeals to tradition emphasize one or other of these two aspects of
tradition. Emphasizing either the latest innovation or the ageless tradition is
used as a strategy to legitimize individual reinterpretations in Chaos Magick.


 23. Many of these publications started life as “zines”. These are usually A5 homemade pamph­
     lets and have been used by many groups as a cheap and effective way to communicate.
 24. Published in 1986. Gematria is a system of assigning numerical value to letters and words.
 25. This publication was originally called CHAOS and later changed to KAOS. It is not to be
     confused with Kaos Magick Journal.
 26. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 181.


                                                                                            97
colin duggan



The ambivalent appeal to tradition is used to distinguish one’s self and one’s
innovations from those of one’s predecessors. Hammer also comments that
“[w]riters will attempt to stress continuity and disregard change, a legitimiz-
ing process that has its typical elements.”27 In the case of Chaos Magick, it will
be shown that although continuity is stressed when legitimizing the tradition,
legitimacy for innovations can be sought through emphasizing change and
showing that innovation is itself a part of Chaos Magick. This will be explained
through an analysis of iconoclasm and perennialism.
    Iconoclasm is used figuratively by Chaos Magicians to signify an irrever-
ent act of tearing down and deriding the established, the dogmatic, or the
conventional. This meaning is derived from iconoclasm as literally destroying
images, icons and idols of a culture, particularly divine images. The word icon-
oclast has been appropriated figuratively to mean a person disregarding the
established ideas of a culture or field which the iconoclast disagrees with and
wishes to disparage in some way. The figurative use of iconoclasm is meant
to refer to the act or process of attacking or destroying conventions in order
to bring about a (need for) change. For the purposes of this chapter, the term
should be understood as a strategy of completely disregarding the established
ideas of one’s predecessors in favour of one’s own ideas. This is how the word
is used by Chaos Magicians. In Liber Null, Carroll states the importance of
iconoclasm for Chaos Magick as follows: “Chief among the techniques of lib-
eration are those which weaken the hold of society, convention, and habit over
the initiate, and those which lead to a more expansive outlook. They are sac-
rilege, heresy, iconoclasm, bioaestheticism [sic], and anathe-mism [sic].”28 This
conception of iconoclasm will be problematized and further clarified in the
larger discussion on perennialism.
    The terms prisca theologia and philosophia perennis are familiar in the field
of Western esotericism and are just two of

      a wide range of terms [that] have been used to refer to the idea that
      there exists an enduring tradition of superior spiritual wisdom,
      available to humanity since the earliest periods of history and kept
      alive through the ages, perhaps by a chain of divinely inspired sages
      or initiatory groups.29

Antoine Faivre explains these terms in his work with regard to Renaissance
esotericism and the Christian context, including precursors to Christianity.30


 27. Ibid., 159.
 28. Carroll, Liber Null and Psychonaut, 45–7.
 29. Hanegraaff, “Tradition”, 1125. For a discussion, see Asprem and Granholm’s chapter on tra-
     dition above.
 30. For Faivre’s review of these concepts, see Faivre, Access to Western Esotericism; Faivre, The
     Eternal Hermes.


98
                                                                 perennialism and iconoclasm



The specifics of this historical overview are not required for the following dis-
cussion, but it is necessary to distinguish between the perennialism described
in this chapter and the notions described in Faivre’s work. These concepts
(prisca theologia and philosophia perennis) assume that an eternal, primordial
truth is handed down by extraordinary teachers through the ages. However,
prisca theologia “emphasized the idea of a wisdom that has been lost, forgot-
ten, overlooked or neglected, and should now be recovered”.31 This implies a
certain degradation of the wisdom over time and superiority over current wis-
dom. Philosophia perennis, on the other hand, “emphasized the continuity of
true wisdom through the ages”32. The latter of these is more important for the
discussion of Chaos Magick. One further note on the usage of these terms
in the field of esotericism concerns their deployment by René Guénon, the
French Traditionalist author. Guénon’s usage of the terms “perennial philoso-
phy” and “perennialism” is derived from the preceding Renaissance usage, and
is described by Mark Sedgwick as follows:

        For a century and a half after Ficino, the idea that there was a
        Perennial Philosophy became increasingly widely accepted. Peren­
        nialism was, however, discredited in the early seventeenth century
        and thereafter survived only at the edges of Western intellectual
        life. Then, in the nineteenth century, Perennialism was revived in
        a slightly modified form, with the newly discovered Vedas being
        taken as its surviving textual expression.33

There is also a more general idea of perennialism arising out of twentieth-­
century sources such as Aldous Huxley’s The Perennial Philosophy. Hanegraaff
comments that “a vague notion of a ‘perennial philosophy’ has come to enjoy
a certain vogue in the domains of alternative spirituality and the New Age
movement”.34 Deriving from this brief history of the concept, “perennialism”,
as it is understood here, is the notion that there is an eternal truth or wisdom
which can be accessed and has been expressed in the world by various ele-
ments down through the ages. It is a useful idea in this form as it can be used
to analyse the discourse on late twentieth-century occultism as having incor-
porated a large degree of subjectivization and democratization. Radical sub-
jectivity, combined with increasing access to information relating to the many
different aspects of Western esotericism, forced a perennialized perspective
into the discourse. For Chaos Magicians, the processes of individualization
and democratization are expressed through the discourse on perennialism
and iconoclasm. Perennialism becomes a democratic framework that includes

 31.   Hanegraaff, “Tradition”, 1126. Cf. Chapter 2 of this volume.
 32.   Ibid.
 33.   Sedgwick, Against the Modern World, 24.
 34.   Hanegraaff, “Tradition”, 1134.


                                                                                         99
colin duggan