That fiction and popular culture can play an important part in the construc-
tion of identities and traditions is something that scholars increasingly start
to acknowledge.94 Still, few scholars other than Christopher Partridge have
explicitly discussed the role of popular culture in religious change, or the sig-
nificance of the esoteric in this context.95 While the importance of ­fiction in
this regard can logically be assumed to have increased under the impact of
modern entertainment media (e.g. television, movies, mass-produced music,
etc.) and new interactive media (particularly the Internet and social network-
ing sites), the phenomenon is in no way new. The example of Rosicrucianism
is a good demonstration. While perhaps not being the first instance of fiction
having a profound effect on the esoteric, Rosicrucianism is certainly one of
the most influential examples, and one of the few that scholars of Western
esotericism make regular notice of. Although the fictional background of this
current is not disregarded by scholars, it is an aspect which is still seldom suf-
ficiently acknowledged, and has yet to be treated in a theoretically interesting
way. The Rosicrucian current was instigated with the publication of two spoof
pamphlets, Fama Fraternitatis (1614) and Confessio Fraternitatis (1615), fol-
lowed by an alchemically loaded play, the Chymische Hochzeit Christiani
Rosencreutz anno 1459 (1616). All texts were published anonymously; how-
ever, the last one has been unambiguously attributed to the (at that time very
young) German theologian Johann Valentin Andreae (1586–1654), while the
two earlier manifestos seem to have been collaborative efforts by Andreae and
a circle of his friends and colleagues.96
    The works presented the story of Christian Rosenkreutz, who, we are
told, came in possession of significant esoteric secrets while travelling in the
Middle East, and subsequently founded a fraternity in the fifteenth century.
While being technically pieces of fiction, the manifestos were long taken to be
genuine communications from an existing secret order dedicated to a “uni-
versal and general reformation of the whole world”. They sparked a furore of
debates for and against the Rosicrucians in the early to middle decades of the
seventeenth century. Eventually, numerous actual Rosicrucian societies were

 94. E.g. Gordon Lynch, “The Role of Popular Music in the Construction of Alternative Spiritual
     Identities and Ideologies”; Lynn Schofield Clark, “Religion, Twice Removed”.
 95. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West. See also Chapter 6 in this volume.
 96. See e.g. Edighoffer, “Rosicrucianism I”, 1009.


                                                                                            45
egil asprem and kennet granholm



formed, all claiming to represent the “true” legacy of the fictitious Christian
Rosenkreutz. Here we can also discern the role played by changing means of
mediation: the impact of the Rosicrucian manifestos would never have been
as immense as it was without the possibility of mass distribution offered by
the invention of the printing press in the fifteenth century. Rosicrucianism
has remained an influential element in the esoteric milieu, with an increased
importance through its impact on Freemasonry, and through major organi-
zations such as AMORC (founded as late as 1915) claiming its heritage. In
Freemasonry, the models of Rosicrucian societies and vocational guilds fused
to form an initiatory society, which in turn came to function as a model for
many later magical orders, such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn
(founded in 1888).
    In the nineteenth century we find several more examples of fiction influ-
encing “esoteric” currents, such as Emma Hardinge Britten’s books – which
further influenced the creation of later initiatory magical orders – and Edward
Bulwer-Lytton’s hugely influential novel Zanoni – which, among many other
things, spread the idea of semi-immortal Rosicrucian “secret chiefs”. In the
twentieth century and beyond, the fiction of H. P. Lovecraft has similarly
asserted an immense influence on occultism.
    In more recent times, science fiction has been a significant source for reli-
gious innovations, and has often been coupled with the esoteric in these pro­
cesses.97 The most familiar example of this, and arguably one of the clearest,
is Scientology.98 The founder of Scientology, L. Ron Hubbard, was a prolific
science fiction author, and many of the elements permeating his fictional
work seem to have influenced the doctrines of Scientology as well. Even more
recent examples are Jediism and Matrixism.99 The former was created as a reli-
gion in religious census surveys in English-speaking countries. Pleas to write
down “Jedi” as a religious orientation were posted online in advance of the
census, with astounding results (in New Zealand 1.5 per cent of the popula-
tion did so).100 What started as a joke has apparently become a serious religio-
philosophical conviction for many people, not in the form of fundamentalist
belief in the truthfulness of the Star Wars movies but as an appreciation of
the perceived spirituality and philosophy in them. In terms of the esoteric it
is interesting to note that George Lucas was highly influenced by the works
of Joseph Campbell when writing the movies. Campbell, as noted earlier, was
a participant of the Eranos meetings, and represents the general esoteric–
Traditionalist ethos of Eranos.101 Matrixism, formed in 2004,102 is based on the

 97. As briefly noted by Granholm in Chapter 15 of this volume.
 98. See Chapter 9 of this volume for more information on both Scientology and its esoteric/
     occult connections.
 99. Cusack, Invented Religions, 120–32.
100. Ibid., 125.
101. Wasserstrom, Religion After Religion, 85, 140, 142–3.
102. Cusack, Invented Religions, 113.

46
                                                               constructing esotericisms



Wachowski brothers’ Matrix trilogy, which, as several scholars have noted, in
many regards represents a “neo-gnostic” philosophy influenced by individual-
istic interpretations of Buddhism.103 Esoteric discourse can certainly be con-
ceived of as playing a part, as the movies – and thus Matrixism as a religion
– revolves around the idea of knowledge providing the power to shape reality.


CONCLUSION

This chapter has taken us through an admittedly large, confusing and com-
plex array of themes and discussions. Nevertheless, certain main points may
be summarized and drawn together.
   First of all, we have made an argument concerning the way one should
fruitfully approach the concept of “tradition” itself. Rather than operational-
izing “tradition” as an analytical tool to look at, for example, means of trans-
mission, coherence and autonomy of cultural systems, structural distinctions
between “modern” and “pre-modern” societies, and so on, we have argued that
a constructivist approach to the invention of tradition is a more promising
path. For this kind of constructivism to succeed, one should furthermore com-
bine historical and sociological approaches, and fully acknowledge the critical
potential of the project.
   Second, these discussions have consequences for the study of contemporary
esotericism. We have suggested that there are especially two types of often-
overlooked co-producers of tradition whose roles need to be highlighted if
the broadly constructivist programme drawn up in this article is to be fol-
lowed, namely: the role of scholarship, and the role of fiction and popular cul-
ture. While both of these have in fact been in operation at least since the early
modern period, they have become increasingly important in the present day.
Also, because of our own embeddedness in contemporary culture, they may
be somewhat harder to spot; they are, so to speak, “hidden in plain sight”. In
the case of popular culture, the media revolutions of the late twentieth cen-
tury, and the popularization of esoteric motifs that is unquestionably occur-
ring in and through it, lead to the production of new source materials which
become resources for constructions of tradition and identity. Fictitious or not,
these cultural products do make an unprecedented number of historical and
mythological narratives connected with the esoteric, as well as elements ripe
for the construction of such, available to wide (and new) audiences. Tracing
the consequences of this must be a concern of the study of contemporary
esotericism.
   When it comes to the role of scholarship, the question is even more com-
plex, as we have seen. A highly significant and overlooked question at the


103. See e.g. Flannery-Dailey & Wagner, “Wake Up!”; Bowman, “The Gnostic Illusion”.


                                                                                      47
egil asprem and kennet granholm



present time is the influence that our very own research area is asserting on
practices and self-conceptions “in the field”. That occultists and neopagans
are avid readers of works produced by scholars of esotericism is no secret,
and we know historically that cultural knowledge produced or repackaged
by academia, having received its official stamp of “quality goods” (with all its
attendant commodity fetishism), tends to become a sought-after commodity
in the more literate milieus of practitioners. In this light, some of the strategies
wielded in order to claim an independent identity for “Western esotericism” as
a more or less autonomous academic field may, regardless of the actual inten-
tions and even explicit statements of some of those involved, have conferred
cultural legitimacy onto practitioners who want to identify with something
like a unique “esoteric tradition” as well. This calls for an increased empha-
sis on scholarly reflexivity in the field, particularly when questions of identity,
essence, and tradition are at stake.




48
chapter 3

INVENTING AFRICA
ESOTERICISM AND THE CREATION OF AN
AFROCENTRIC TRADITION IN AMERICA

Fredrik Gregorius



Paul Gilroy’s study of African Diaspora culture, The Black Atlantic, begins
with three quotes. One of them, from Friedrich Nietzsche, reads: