Regardless of what Sessions states, the manifesto is saturated in philosophical
implications;40 yet, what is most noteworthy about Sessions’s definition is how
he conceptualizes the manifesto’s collective meaning. As stated in the preface
of Deep Ecology for the 21st Century as well as elsewhere, the manifesto, and
by extension Deep Ecology, is intended to bring about “a major paradigm shift
– a shift in perception, values, and lifestyles” which will facilitate the “move
from anthropocentrism to ecocentrism”.41 The move to ecocentrism, as well as
the notion of perennial philosophy which Sessions uses to validate this para-
digm shift, are aspects of an esoteric discourse on higher knowledge; however,
before relating why this is so, one vital caveat must be made. Following the
argument made by Sessions, Devall, Drengson and McLaughlin, Deep Ecology
is defined by the manifesto and not to be mistakenly defined by the contents of
any particular ecosophy. This prohibition is repeatedly made and has become
a benchmark in their writings. However, for the scholar studying the various
interpretations of Deep Ecology, that is to say DE, only the inverse is true. At
the risk of repetition, Deep Ecology does not exist outside of the discursive
field that produces it. Accordingly, the claim that Deep Ecology is defined by
its manifesto must be understood as merely an interpretive element that is
shared by a number of theorists, the most significant of whom is Sessions,
as he both co-authored the manifesto and stands as its foremost proponent.
Therefore, the following section will not scrutinize the Deep Ecology-as-
manifesto interpretation per se as much as it will focus on Sessions’s interpre-
tation in its entirety, in which paradigm shifts and perennial philosophy play a
central role.42


 39. Ibid., 86–9.
 40. See Glasser, “On Warwick Fox’s Assessment of Deep Ecology”; Eric Katz, “Against the
     Inevitability of Anthropocentrism”.
 41. Sessions, Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, ix. See also Sessions, “Wildness, Cyborgs, and
     Our Ecological Future”, 123.
 42. This is not to say that Devall, Drengson and McLaughlin do not share Sessions’s belief in
     paradigms shifts and perennial philosophy; they do; however, there are differences and
     their similar interpretations of Deep Ecology do not garner nearly as much attention as
     Sessions.


                                                                                           297
joseph christian greer



   Drawing directly from Aldous Huxley’s The Perennial Philosophy, Sessions
conceptualizes Deep Ecology as the contemporary manifestation of a primor-
dial metaphysic. Utilizing a form of green historicism, Sessions describes the
history of human existence in terms of the conflict between an ecocentric per-
ennial philosophy and the millennia-long “anthropocentric detour” that has
marginalized it. In a section entitled “Ecocentrism and the Anthropocentric
Detour: Why Deep Ecology Reemerged Late in Western History”, which
appeared in a longer essay that was reprinted in his volume, Sessions traces
the roots of Deep Ecology’s ecocentric perspective from the “most primal or
hunting/gathering societies throughout the world” to the “Milesian philoso-
phers”, “Taoism and other Eastern religions [which] retained elements of the
ancient shamanistic Nature religion”, the Presocratics, and through to the
thirteenth-century nature mystic St Francis of Assisi, the seventeenth-­century
“cosmic non-anthropocentric philosophy” of Spinoza, and “the Romantic
Nature-oriented countercultural movement of the nineteenth century”, the
Transcendentalists, conservationists like Muir, to the ecological writings of
Aldous Huxley, Rachel Carson and Aldo Leopold, to “the Zen Buddhism of
Alan Watts, and Gary Snyder”, and finally culminating in the work of Arne
Naess and the Deep Ecology movement.43 Over and against this peren-
nial philosophy, Sessions, expanding on the Lynn White thesis, identifies an
anthropocentric discourse that has “detoured” humanity from their primor-
dial relationship with nature.44 Originating with the advent of agriculture,
Sessions claims that “the Western religious tradition [identified as ‘Judaeo/
Christian’] began to divorce itself from wild Nature” and with “the culmina-
tion of Athenian philosophy in Aristotle, an anthropocentric system of philos-
ophy and science was set in place, which was to play a major role in Western
thought until the seventeenth century”.45 Despite the “second opportunity
for Western culture to abandon the anthropocentric detour” that Spinoza’s
philosophy afforded, Sessions maintains that anthropocentrism continued
and indeed continues unabated as a result of the continued hegemony of the
Abrahamic religions, Newtonian Science, and the anthropocentric humanism
of modern and postmodern philosophy (with Marx and Dewey exemplifying
the former, and Foucault, Derrida and Lyotard the latter).46
   In placing Deep Ecology within an oppressed tradition of higher knowl-
edge, Sessions’s interpretation of Deep Ecology bears a striking resemblance

 43. Sessions, “Ecocentrism and the Greens”, 66–7; Sessions, “Preface”, ix.
 44. Made in 1967 in the pages of the renown journal Science, the Lynn White thesis refers to
     the historian Lynn White’s article “The Historical Roots of Our Ecological Crisis”, which
     argued that Christianity bore the heaviest burden for the environmental crisis as it was “the
     most anthropocentric religion the world has seen.” White, “The Historical Roots of Our
     Ecological Crisis”, 1205.
 45. Sessions, “Ecocentrism and the Greens”, 66–7.
 46. Ibid., 67; Sessions, “Postmodernism and Environmental Justice”, 4; Devall & Sessions, Deep
     Ecology, 18–39, 41–9, 80–81.


298
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



to other esoteric discourses. Commenting on this strategy as it is often used by
esoteric discourses to justify their access to higher knowledge, Olav Hammer
notes that “emic historiography highlights only a few episodes in what is con-
ceived as the spiritual development of mankind. It creates a (usually vague)
chronology, from ancient civilizations … and rapidly proceeds to the present
age”.47 Hammer continues:

       these historical stations form a more or less fragmentary myth …
       The oldest element [of the myth] is the meta-historical readiness to
       interpret history in terms of a movement from an ancient Golden
       Age, via a less-than-perfect present, up to a utopian future.48

In light of Hammer’s analysis, Sessions’s use of the term “anthropological
detour” is thrown into sharp relief as the historiography of Deep Ecology con-
forms to the mythic trajectory Hammer describes. In fact, the Golden Age of
this perennial philosophy not only persists on the margins of the mainstream,
but historically speaking, casts a shadow over the present insofar as “99% of
all humans who have ever lived on Earth have been hunter/gathers” lead-
ing Sessions to conclude “it is clear that ecocentrism has been the dominant
human perspective throughout history”.49 Deviation from this perspective has,
according to Sessions, landed man in an environmental crisis verging on the
apocalyptic, and thus his reading of the present elevates the necessity of the
ecocentric perspective to a matter of planetary life or death.50 The present is
so dire that nothing short of “the revival of the perennial philosophy tradition”
wherein “metaphysics, psychology, theory of knowledge, ethics, and social and
political theory” are united into a “coherent and integrated view of the world
and meaning of human life” can ensure the ecosphere’s continued existence.51
A revival of this magnitude would constitute a planetary ecocentric paradigm
shift, which Sessions describes as “a radically new understanding of reality; a
‘conversion’ to an ecological consciousness” that marks a clear break with the
ecologically destructive zeitgeist of modern industrial society.52 Vastly differ-
ent from anthropocentrism, “the ecocentric perspective involves a biological,
as well as a cultural, understanding of the human species resulting in a new


 47. Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 91–2.
 48. Ibid., 92.
 49. Sessions, “Ecocentrism and the Greens”, 66.
 50. It is important to note the mention of the “21st century” in the title of Sessions’s text as
     it exemplifies his historiographic contextualization of the Deep Ecology movement, that
     is, as a contemporary manifestation of perennial wisdom. Additionally, the name reflects
     Sessions commitment to defining Deep Ecology as a solidified “here and now” movement,
     and is to be read as a response to an article Naess wrote three years previous entitled “Deep
     Ecology for the 22nd Century”.
 51. Devall & Sessions, Deep Ecology, 81.
 52. Sessions, “Ecocentrism and the Greens”, 66.


                                                                                             299
joseph christian greer