emotional demands of its “users”, and takes steps to ensure that its emotional
programme is appropriate to those it wishes to recruit or retain.43 Religion in
late modern society has a range of possibilities open with different emotional
consequences. Denominations that have adapted to religious pluralism gener-
ally follow a strategy of offering those parts of the emotional scale for which
there is a societal demand. Religious reform movements may in a more direct
way confront the social and cultural sources of emotional dissonance, offer
critique, and propose social reform. Alternative forms of spirituality often deal
directly and explicitly with the emotional states and requirements of individ-
uals, and may offer either more encompassing emotional regimes, or more
limited therapeutic interventions. Some sects and minority religions may
encapsulate themselves to provide an internally consistent and encompassing
emotional regime that offers a sharp alternative to the emotional orderings of
wider society.44
   Riis and Woodhead reject reducing emotions to something private, per-
sonal and subjective, and instead favour an analysis of emotion as constructed
in the interplay between social agents and structures. They argue that emo-
tion is both personal and relational, private and social, biological and cultural,
active and passive.45 Emotions are shaped not just by interpersonal relations,
but by relations with complexes of cultural symbols and material settings as
well. Our emotional life is shaped by encounters not only with living beings,
but also with imagined, transcendent, inanimate and dead ones. The signifi-
cance of culture, material objects, memories, places and symbols has to be
taken into account. Emotion is generated in these interactions between self
and society, self and symbol, and symbol and society.46 Religious emotion is
further expressed through ritual, music, art and architecture.47
   Riis and Woodhead also note the relation between emotion and cha-
risma, in connection with Max Weber’s notion of charismatic authority. They
observe that the charismatic individual appears emotionally charged, catches
the attention of his followers, and provokes strong feelings.48 This point easily
connects to the contemporary spiritual scene, where close relations between
“consultant” and “client” are common. These connections will become clear in
the following section, where we shall look at the case study of Hälsogränden
in Hedemora.




 43.   Ibid., 203.
 44.   Ibid., 205–6.
 45.   Ibid., 5.
 46.   Ibid., 7.
 47.   Ibid., 13.
 48.   Ibid., 164.



380
                                                    a small - town health centre in sweden



HÄLSOGRÄNDEN IN HEDEMORA

Hälsogränden is a health centre situated in central Hedemora, a small Swedish
town with medieval roots and around 7300 inhabitants (2005). In November
2009 five different therapists shared premises at this health centre.49 Anette
Hansson, who is the initiator of Hälsogränden, conducts classes in “life yoga”,
which is a local development of the kundalini yoga of Yogi Bhajan.50 She is
also a stress therapist.51 The second therapist at Hälsogränden works with
mindfulness, light therapy, Rosen therapy, essential movement and classic
massage. She also sells African cotton clothes – produced in a small factory
where the employees enjoy relatively fair wages, free health care and certain
other material advantages. Rosen therapy is a massage technique with men-
tal and emotional connotations, aimed at contacting unconscious emotions
and memories locked into the body. Essential movement is a body movement
therapy, developed from Rosen therapy, where dance, music and voice are
used to get in touch with one’s own creativity, expressiveness and inner con-
fidence.52 Essential movement is also concerned with reconnecting with the
body as a source of aliveness, creativity and wisdom.53 The third therapist at
Hälsogränden is a dietician, works with physical exercise and sells dietary sup-
plements. The fourth one is a hairdresser, whose team, besides the ordinary
hairdressing procedures, also does “aura haircuts”, explained as a kind of “hair
balancing” where acupuncture energy is stimulated, the chakras are balanced
and support is provided so that imbalances inside the body may be healed.
The hair is seen as antennae, receiving energy from the aura.54 The hairdress-
ing team can also give reiki healing in connection with head massage. The fifth
therapist works with psychotherapy on a psychodynamic basis.55


 49. At the time of writing this article, in September 2010, some changes as to which therapists
     share the premises have occurred. It is still, however, a mixture of mainstream and alterna-
     tive health care, as it was in November 2009. The spiritual scene is quite flexible, and such
     changes are common.
 50. The parent organization of Yogi Bhajan’s kundalini yoga is 3HO (Healthy, Happy, Holy
     Organization), which was founded in USA in 1969. This form of yoga was introduced to
     Sweden during the 1990s by Tomas Frankell, a well-known spokesperson for new religions
     and alternative spirituality. He has chosen to stay outside the organization of 3HO and has
     distanced himself from Yogi Bhajan, nowadays calling his approach “life yoga”, considering
     it a Western adaptation of yoga. For further information, see Frisk, Nyreligiositet i Sverige;
     Livsyoga, “Livsyogan”.
 51. As a stress therapist, Anette Hansson works with breathing, relaxation, body awareness,
     thought awareness, affirmations, visualization and dialogue/coaching (interview by author,
     Hedemora, Sweden, 11 November 2009).
 52. Hälsogränden, “Hälsogränden”.
 53. Essential Motion, “Essential Motion”.
 54. Hälsogränden, “Hälsogränden”.
 55. Hansson, interview by author, Hedemora, Sweden, 11 November 2009.



                                                                                              381
liselotte frisk



    According to Anette Hansson, the purpose of Hälsogränden is to be a kind
of oasis, where people can freely select among different kinds of treatments.
The therapists active at Hälsogränden often recommend each other to their
customers, and Hansson thinks that there is something for everyone at the
centre. She says that someone might come in for a simple haircut, and eventu-
ally leave with a spiritual experience. Hansson feels that there is really not much
difference between yoga and psychotherapy, and says that the psychotherapist
at Hälsogränden works with the inner part of the person exactly as in yoga.
    The key concept of Hälsogränden is “health”,56 which Anette Hansson inter-
prets as having both an external and an internal meaning. Internal and external
health are, according to her understanding, connected, and exist in a dialectal
relationship. On the one hand, if you are in contact with your inner space, you
will also want to take care of your external part. Hansson likes to conceive of
the body as a temple to be taken care of like a holy space. On the other hand,
when you feel better by taking care of your external part, you will also want to
take care of your inside. Thus, health could well be connected to, for example,
a haircut, with the purpose of taking care of your body, but also to spiritual-
ity. For Hansson, spirituality is another term for internal health. She explains
spirituality as making contact with your own inner space which, in turn, is in
contact with a higher intelligence. According to Hansson, there is a great need
in society for people to listen inwards and to be in touch with their feelings.
Anette Hansson thinks that to practise spirituality means to be in contact with
the internal space, to be love itself, not to judge, and to be in one’s own heart.
For her, yoga is the gateway to spirituality in this sense. When she started
practising yoga, she felt that the dimension of spirituality was present only
during yoga classes – now, however, she says that this feeling has expanded to
be present in her life all the time. Besides her ordinary yoga classes, Hansson
also conducts one class a week in cooperation with the Swedish social insur-
ance administration and the employment office, for people on long-term
sick leave and long-term unemployment. She says that she experiences a
big change in how spiritual teachings are perceived today compared with a
few years ago – there is much more acceptance now than there used to be.57
    In my interview, Anette Hansson was asked if she recognizes the compo-
nents of Faivre’s concept of Western esotericism in life yoga. Although this
approach could be taken to misrepresent Faivre’s original intentions, as he
suggested a historical perspective and not a typological definition of universal
application, Hansson’s answer to this question is still relevant in the context of
this chapter as it illustrates the presence or absence of affinities with “historical
esotericism”.58 Hansson says that the first criterion, “correspondences”, exists

 56. As indicated by the name: “Hälso” means “health”, and “gränden” means “small street”.
 57. Interview by author, Hedemora, Sweden, 11 November 2009.
 58. As noted above, Faivre meant to describe certain European historical currents, from which
     yoga of course is excluded. As we saw, there has however been criticism expressed towards


382
                                                   a small - town health centre in sweden