from physics to biology during the inter-war period.33 The professionalization
of parapsychology not only coincided historically with these debates, but its
main protagonists made explicit links to relevant concerns in these bordering
disciplines.34
   The problem of disenchantment has a longer history internally in psychi-
cal research. The first systematic, organized attempts to create a scientific
discipline out of a field of knowledge typically associated with the occult and
supernatural under this heading took place in late Victorian England.35 The
establishment of the Society for Psychical Research (SPR) in 1882 brought
together a group of scientists, philosophers and other scholars, organized on
the model of the scientific society or club, striving towards serious recogni-
tion by other scientific communities and professional societies.36 The attempt
to establish a discipline for this kind of research attests, on the one hand, to
the presence of a whole range of esoteric religious practices in the Victorian
“occult revival”, especially spiritualism.37 On the other hand, organized psychi-
cal research also bears testimony to the high authority of the scientific project
around the turn of the nineteenth century. Psychical research was thus born
from an encounter between the scientism of Victorian scientific naturalism,
and the worldview, practices and rhetorical claims of spiritualists, occultists
and some liberal Christian reformers.38 This nexus gave rise to a discourse in
which the invocation of scientific authority remained the primary legitimizing
strategy, or, as Alex Owen writes concerning late-Victorian occultism in gen-
eral, a discourse “undermining scientific naturalism as a worldview”, while at
the same time co-opting “the language of science” and staking “a strong claim
to rationality”.39
   For the early psychical researchers, however, much more was at stake than
merely claiming “the language of science”. The organization itself consisted of
some of the most reputed scientists of the day, including later Nobel laureates
Lord Rayleigh, J. J. Thomson, and Charles Richet, later Prime Minister Arthur
Balfour, and many other professors, journalists, editors and notables of British
intellectual life. In other words, and this is important for our present concerns:


 33. See e.g. Anne Harrington, Reenchanted Science; Forman, “Weimar Culture, Causality,
     and Quantum Theory, 1918–1927”; Allen, “Mechanism, Vitalism and Organicism in Late
     Nineteenth and Twentieth-Century Biology”; Wolffram, “Supernormal Biology”.
 34. See Asprem, “A Nice Arrangement of Heterodoxies”, 135–9.
 35. For some precursors and parallel developments in nineteenth-century Germany, see e.g.
     Treitel, A Science for the Soul; Wolffram, The Stepchildren of Science.
 36. For the foundation and early history of the SPR, see Gauld, The Founders of Psychical
     Research; Oppenheim, The Other World; Frank Miller Turner, Between Science and Religion;
     cf. Luckhurst, The Invention of Telepathy.
 37. The relation between spiritualism and psychical research is the main focus of Oppenheim,
     The Other World.
 38. Cf. Frank Miller Turner, Between Science and Religion.
 39. Owen, The Place of Enchantment, 13.


342
                                       psychic enchantments of the educated classes



psychical research was, at the outset, an elite phenomenon. In fact, although
it has become the habit among many contemporary esotericists, New Agers,
and even parapsychologists to claim that paranormal phenomena would have
been accepted as fact had it not been for the repression of “narrow-minded”
academic elites, it is tempting to say that something of the opposite is true:
at the turn of the nineteenth century it was precisely parts of the academic
elite that elevated certain paranormal phenomena to a degree of acceptability
among the public. The claim to scientific legitimacy for the paranormal was
born in academic elite circles.
    The latter is more than a trivial point. From a historical and scientific per-
spective, the question is not so much why “paranormal phenomena” have not
become part of the scientific canon, but rather why the claim to scientific sta-
tus of some of these phenomena has been as resilient as it has. Borrowing
from actor-network theory and the sociology of science more broadly, it is
tempting to make the case that the social and cultural resources the SPR
pooled together were crucial for establishing credibility and legitimacy for its
pursuit of psychical research.40 Even if many of the biggest scientific celebrities
of the society were less active members, and some surely belonged to its scep-
tical wing, sporting their names on the membership list provided the SPR with
scientific–cultural legitimacy which made psychical research impossible to
neglect for the educated public. Another social reason, or perhaps rather pre-
condition, for the SPR’s initial success was that it wielded a swift and efficient
“boundary-work” towards spiritualist and occultist communities.41 This made
it possible to dissociate the “scientific” and “reputable” psychical research from
“muddle-headed occultism”, and claim the occult phenomena as part of legiti-
mate science.
    Finally, it is interesting to note that the kind of cultural legitimacy which
psychical research had managed to establish largely disintegrated with the
death of the leading members who had tied it all together, especially Henry
Sidgwick, Frederic Myers and William James. This may be read as a collapse of
the “actor-network” that the SPR had assembled; the ensuing generational shift
also led to a reorientation of the society towards spiritualism, which may be
read as a collapse of their boundary-work. As a result, SPR groups of the early
twentieth century tended to break up over a pro-spiritualist/pro-science divide.
Modern experimental parapsychology, in turn, grew out of the pro-­science
wing of the SPR milieu, of which William McDougall was a front figure.42


 40. I have outlined this argument in somewhat more detail in Asprem, “Parapsychology”;
     Asprem, “A Nice Arrangement of Heterodoxies”. A similar approach is developed in
     Luckhurst, The Invention of Telepathy.
 41. For the concept of “boundary-work”, see Gieryn, “Boundary-Work and the Demarcation
     of Science from Non-Science”; Gieryn, Cultural Boundaries of Science; cf. the broader
     approach developed in Hess, Science in the New Age, 145–6.
 42. E.g. Asprem, “A Nice Arrangement of Heterodoxies”.


                                                                                     343
egil asprem



   To summarize the central point of this section: “paranormal” phenom-
ena connected to extraordinary mental and perceptive abilities such as ESP,
telepathy and clairvoyance, were lifted out of (“disembedded” from) occultism,
spiritualism, and vernacular religiosity by a group of highly educated intel-
lectuals, led by academics and scientists, in the name of “psychical research”.
Through the transition to parapsychology, the phenomena in question were
repackaged and reformed, given technical designations, and supported with
reference to experiment, evidence and philosophical arguments. Furthermore,
attempts were made to connect them to central contemporary problems in
reputable scientific disciplines, especially biology, psychology and physics.
Reconnecting them to a discourse on religion and spirituality, parapsychologi-
cal concepts were already packaged as standard elements of a prospective “sci-
entific religion” for intellectuals. The hope that psychical research would help
create a future scientific religion was indeed explicitly stated by one of the
SPR’s founders, Frederick Myers, and one finds similar traits in the popular
and public writings of the pioneers of experimental parapsychology as well,
including McDougall and Rhine.43


Disenchantment, re-enchantment, and the naturalization of the supernatural

In his important New Age Religion and Western Culture (1996), Wouter J.
Hanegraaff described the post-war religious development of New Age as
an expression of a broader “secularization of esotericism”, a process that he
linked to the Weberian notion of disenchantment: ideas that have been con-
nected with the esoteric discourses of the Renaissance have gone through a
reinterpretation in the light of a “disenchanted” culture that arose in the wake
of the Enlightenment.44 With reference to this process, Hanegraaff defined
“occultism” as “all attempts by esotericists to come to terms with a disen-
chanted world or, alternatively, by people in general to make sense of esoteri-
cism from the perspective of a disenchanted secular world”.45 This definition

 43. For Myers’s views on psychical research, science, and religion, see Frank Miller Turner,
     Between Science and Religion, 104–133; for McDougall’s linking of psychical research to
     religion, see Asprem, “A Nice Arrangement of Heterodoxies”, 135–9; for parapsychology
     more generally, see Hess, Science in the New Age, 76–85.
 44. For the whole argument, which is a lot more complex than can be shown from one sen-
     tence, see Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 411–513. Also cf. Hanegraaff,
     “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of the World”.
 45. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 422 (emphasis omitted). Note that this
     definition differs markedly from other common definitions of occultism in the literature.
     Essentially, for Hanegraaff occultism is a type of esoteric discourse under specific devel-
     opmental conditions and encompasses a broad range of subjects, groups and currents. A
     more historically specific usage is also common, by which occultism refers to nineteenth-
     century attempts to revive Renaissance occult philosophy and magic, particularly in France,
     and later in England. For this usage, see e.g. Pasi, “Occultism”.


344
                                          psychic enchantments of the educated classes