does not mean that the movement can comprehensively be labelled as such.
This constitutes a difference between his interpretation and Sessions’s. Yet
this indeterminacy should be altogether expected from Naess as it remained
a hallmark in his writing from early on in his career.86 Keeping in mind what
has been shown to be esoteric in Naess’s definition, Katz’s claim that all Deep
Ecology theorizing, and by extension all ecosophies, rely on Naess’s ontologi-
cal framework makes the case that DE is in fact esoteric.
   The third interpretation of Deep Ecology is echoed by a number of crit-
ics, but few accounts are as cogent as Eric Katz’s “Against the Inevitability of
Anthropocentrism”. The pith of Katz’s argument is the claim that Deep Ecology
theorizing is based on Naess’s worldview. Katz summarizes this position:

        It [Deep Ecology] is a philosophy that focuses on the fundamen-
        tal ontological interrelatedness and identification of all life forms,
        natural objects, and ecosystems. The ethics and politics of deep
        ecology – those ideas most clearly expressed in its platform – are
        secondary; they are derived from the basic ontological commit-
        ments of a deep ecological worldview.87

Confronting Sessions’s interpretation head-on, Katz’s work demonstrates
how the individual tenets of the manifesto, its composite statement of eco-
centrism, and Naess’s assumption that all normative derivation will lead to an
ecocentric perspective rely on the ontological framework of Ecosophy T. The
three aspects of this ontology, which Katz claims can be found in “virtually
all discussions of deep ecology” as “core doctrines”,88 include the pro­cess of
identification with the natural world, the goal of Self-realization and a rela-
tional holistic ontology.89 Essential to Katz’s argument is that Naess’s belief
in “the supremacy of environmental ontology and realism over environmen-
tal ethics”90 carries with it the assumption that Deep Ecology is founded on
gestalt ontology. While the specifics of Katz’s argument do not concern us
here, there is ample evidence that proves that, at one point in time, Sessions,
Devall, McLaughlin and Naess all defined DE in terms of this ontological tri-
umvirate.91 When related back to Naess’s and Sessions’s definitions, the com-
plications in working out who deems what a legitimate expression of Deep
Ecology increases considerably.


 86.   See Naess, “Docta Ignorantia and the Application of General Guidelines”.
 87.   Katz et al., “Introduction”, xiv.
 88.   Eric Katz “Against the Inevitability of Anthropocentrism”, 25.
 89.   Ibid., 18.
 90.   Naess, “Self-Realization”, 236.
 91.   For a fuller treatment of the instances where these figures defined Deep Ecology in terms of
       Ecosophy T’s ontology see Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 225–42.


306
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



   In order to clarify the complications which enshroud the esoteric elements
in DE, the competing discourses on defining Deep Ecology can be laid out as
follows: following Katz, DE should be labelled esoteric because the philoso-
phy of Deep Ecology is based on Naess’s esoteric ontology; therefore, all of
the “pieces of esoteric flotsam” mentioned earlier in the text, including the
Council of All Beings, Transpersonal Ecology, the ritual practice of eco-mag-
ick, and ecocentric paradigm shifts, should be understood as definitive expres-
sions of Deep Ecology as they presume ontological holism and the possibility
of Self-realization. Katz’s conception of Deep Ecology dramatically differs
from Arne Naess’s interpretation, for what appear to be esoteric flotsams are
actually ecosophical elaborations derived from an ultimate norm, which Naess
“hypothesizes” will be ecocentric if sufficiently deep enough.92 As the expres-
sion of an ecosophy, these esoteric elaborations are partially definitive of Deep
Ecology, albeit non-exclusively, for Deep Ecology is both the process by which
higher knowledge is achieved and the ecosophies which possess it.93 In stark
contrast to Katz and Naess, ­adopting Sessions’s interpretation would lead one
to conclude that the esoteric elements in DE are indeed flotsams that do not
even remotely define Deep Ecology, but belong instead to personal ecosophi-
cal positions. The implications that follow from these perspectives play out in
how Deep Ecology is reinterpreted beyond the writings of its foremost archi-
tects and its principal critique, and more importantly how scholars adjudicate
these reinterpretations, or in other words, determine what can legitimately be
ascribed to DE. Considering their drastic variation, it should come as no sur-
prise that discussions concerning what Deep Ecology is and who belongs to it
are going on their third decade.


CONCLUSION

The findings of the current study do not as much refute the claim that Deep
Ecology is a form of contemporary esotericism, but rather revise what is
inherently problematic in such a generalization. The revision can be summed
up thus: the interpretations of Deep Ecology that act as a backbone for DE
are esoteric in divergent ways. As has been shown, the variance between the
three most prominent interpretations of Deep Ecology is reflected in the lack


 92. Ibid., 205.
 93. Naess acknowledges that using normative derivation and arriving at one’s ultimate
     norm is more suitable for “a small group of a movement’s theorists” than a mass audi-
     ence. Consequentially, he justifies his role in the manifesto as well as his advocacy for it
     in light of the fact that only a fraction of the people associated with DE have worked out
     ecosophies with the underlying assumption being that ecocentrism would be the ultimate
     norm arrived at if those who do not have ecosophies used normative derivation. Naess,
     “Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement”, 205.


                                                                                            307
joseph christian greer



of uniformity in how each interpretation is esoteric. Sessions’s interpretation
is esoteric on account of his portrayal of ecocentrism historiographically, that
is, as a form of perennial wisdom. Working from different assumptions and
towards different aims, Naess’s definition was based on providing direct access
to the esoteric knowledge Sessions historicized. Lastly, in locating the non-
dual ontology and potential for Self-realization of Ecosophy T in normative
derivation and Sessions’s concept of ecocentrism, Katz showed how all DE
theorizing is essentially esoteric as it follows from ontological holism. Since
the way Deep Ecology is defined determines the manner in which it is eso-
teric, the polyfocal approach presents the only way for scholars to adequately
recognize the plurality of esoteric discourses in DE, and, further, which eso-
teric discourse is being utilized at any particular discursive junction.
    Admittedly, the foregoing analysis focuses exclusively on highly specific
academic interpretations of Deep Ecology. Little regard was afforded to the
ethnographic data that explains how these theories are received outside of
academia and even less regard was given to asking what these beliefs do to
the people who hold them. While undoubtedly important, these ­questions
belong to the field of sociology, and, more to the point, the sociology of eso-
tericism.94 However, a polyfocal understanding of DE permits both ethno-
graphic researchers and scholars interested in the philosophy of DE a method
of analysis that is able to organize expressions of Deep Ecology that borrow,
obscure, conflate and disregard elements of the definitions which gave rise to
the milieu. Moreover, in laying out the differences between the seminal defi-
nitions of Deep Ecology, scholars are better able to track how familiarity with
particular definitions correlates to the inclusion or rejection of additional and
alternative esoteric discourses. Going even further, in permitting scholars
to discuss DE as a “semiotic” which Burkhard Gladigow describes as assem-
bling “different religions and the constructions of meaning in parts of society
like signs in a system of signs”, the polyfocal approach draws into better detail
the salient presence of channelling, neopaganism, Transpersonal Psychology,
and New Physics in the milieu.95 The discursive transfers between these fields
signal more than the commingling of “fringe” influences with environmental
concern; rather, their salient presence in the milieu testifies to an ongoing and
dynamic process of popularization, innovation and appropriation that marks
the existence of esoteric discourses in contemporary society.




 94. See Granholm, “The Sociology of Esotericism”.
 95. Gladigow, quoted in von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 87.


308
chapter 15

THE SECULAR, THE POST-SECULAR
AND THE ESOTERIC IN THE PUBLIC SPHERE
Kennet Granholm