The key voices championing the Indigo discourse are all expanding upon the
ideas of Nancy Ann Tappe. A general history of these core sources and voices
is central to understanding what the Indigo Child phenomenon is about. The
first ones to write a book entirely devoted to the Indigo Children were Lee
Carroll and Jan Tober. Their aforementioned book The Indigo Children, with
the catchphrase “the new kids have arrived”, was written in 1998 and became
the core text of the Indigo discourse. Their ideas followed Tappe’s closely and
interviews with her were included as part of the book. Lee Carroll is a prac-
titioner of channelling, and discovered his abilities in this regard later in life
after a successful career in business. He began channelling Kryon,52 an entity
that he identifies as an archangel similar to Michael, in 1991, and continues to
this day. The majority of Carroll’s channelling sessions take place before large
audiences and he has even appeared multiple times at the United Nations
building in New York before their recreational Society for Enlightenment
and Transformation. Carroll has authored several books of his channelling
with Kryon and has co-authored three books on Indigo Children: The Indigo
Children (1999), Indigo Celebration (2001) and The Indigo Children: 10 Years
Later (2009). Jan Tober, Carroll’s co-author, is a jazz singer and local televi-
sion show host who became involved with Carroll’s Kryon Channelling ses-
sions.53 She gives her own workshops on sound and colour at many of the
Kryon events. It was the “spiritual partnership” of these two New Age celeb-
rity figures that initially popularized the Indigo Child concept and as a result
their book, The Indigo Children, quickly became a bestseller. It should be noted
that the book is largely the writing of other people, edited, compiled and com-
mented upon by Tober and Carroll. The Indigo Children is quite different from
some other books on Indigos in that it seeks to avoid alienating an audience
that is unaccustomed to New Age ideas. Carroll and Tober keep the “spiritual
aspects of Indigos” segregated within their own chapter in the book, and this
chapter begins with a disclaimer:

 51. Indigo Evolution.
 52. Kryon, “Lee Carroll Bio”. Channelling “refers to the conviction of psychic mediums that
     they are able, under certain circumstances, to act as a channel for information from sources
     other than their normal selves. Most typically, these sources are identified as discarnate
     ‘entities’ living on higher levels of being” (Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western
     Culture, 23).
 53. Tober, “Bio”.

                                                                                            361
daniel kline



      Please note: If you are at all offended by New Age metaphysics or
      spiritual talk in general, then please skip this chapter. We don’t
      want the information contained here to bias your feelings about
      this book, or the principles being presented in the other chapters.
         For some, the subject is foolishness and goes against common
      spiritual teachings in the Western world. The perception might
      be that it contains information that goes against doctrinal issues
      taught from birth about God and established religion. Therefore, it
      might cause you to question your acceptance of the quality infor-
      mation coming in subsequent chapters.
         Yet for others, it is the Holy Grail of the whole message!54

This attempt to separate the concept of the Indigo Children from New Age
teachings is probably part of the reason why the book, and by virtue of that
the whole Indigo Children discourse, has been so influential. Even this part of
the book makes no mention of Kryon or channelling in any form, rather the
book is limited to hinting at reincarnation, karma, reiki energy healing and a
few other staples of New Age culture. In comparison with other authors writ-
ing on the subject, the Indigos are portrayed in a relatively mundane fashion,
as gifted children who want to be treated as equals and not powerful psychics
here to save the world. Their next book, Indigo Celebration, was published in
2001 and contained more stories and personal anecdotes from parents, educa-
tors, New Age authors and several self-identifying Indigo Children.
   Doreen Virtue is another figure of immense influence and importance for
the Indigo Child movement. Virtue has a PhD in Counselling and has worked
extensively with abused women.55 She also identifies herself as a medium and
gives this testimony from her life:

      As a child, Doreen was a natural clairvoyant, seeing and convers-
      ing with what many people call “invisible friends”. But this natural
      gift and ability was little understood by the young Doreen and her
      family, and was the cause of teasing by her friends. Consequently,
      Doreen learned to deny her abilities, effectively shutting them
      down before she was mature enough to fully appreciate them. But
      on July 15, 1995, Doreen’s personal life and her career, marked by
      exemplary but conventional success, would be irrevocably altered
      by an incident that is nothing short of miraculous.56

 54. Carroll & Tober, Indigo Children, 109.
 55. There is some uncertainty over where Doreen Virtue received her PhD and whether it is
     an accredited institution. This information is derived from various “Sceptic” sites on the
     web. Like so many other figures in the Indigo Children discourse (or New Age in gen-
     eral) Virtue’s whole life has become a battlefield between New Age enthusiasts and self-­
     identified sceptics.
 56. Virtue, “About Doreen Virtue”.

362
                                                                     the new kids



Virtue’s miracle came in the form of angelic communications, which she
describes as saving her from an attempted mugging and carjacking. The
majority of Virtue’s work has been on the subject of angelic communications,
mediumship and their use in healing. Doreen Virtue has also written books
on Indigos, “crystal children” and “rainbow children”, including her aforemen-
tioned The Care and Feeding of Indigo Children. She has appeared on many
talk shows, gives seminars, and edits and writes for several magazines. Doreen
Virtue also appeared in the documentary film on Indigo Children, entitled
Indigo Evolution, which serves as the next step in this survey of sources for the
Indigo Child movement.
    Indigo Evolution is a documentary film made in 2005 about the Indigo
Child phenomenon. It was directed and produced by James Twyman and Kent
Romney, and featured interviews with authors, educators, ADHD specialists,
parents and several self-professed Indigo Children. The film does not attempt
to give a unified vision of what the Indigo Children are or why they are here.
At several points throughout the film it becomes clear that the term “Indigo
Child” means radically different things to different people. The film portrays
this pluralistic vision of the discursive landscape, which ranges from Virtue
and those who advocate “psychic children”, to medical professionals who are
focused solely on the difficulties of educating a new generation, to those who
say that every child is an Indigo Child. The film also contains interviews with
several self-identified Indigo Children who demonstrate their artistic and
creative genius. Finally, a good portion of the film is devoted to the personal
stories of parents who have received messages or spiritual insights from their
Indigo Children. The film presents an overview of many of the core figures
and issues in the Indigo Child discourse and led to greater public exposure for
the Indigo phenomenon.
    Twyman also produced a previous film, Indigo, in 2003, which starred Neale
Donald Walsch, the author of Conversations with God, a bestselling New Age
title.57 Indigo tells the story of an Indigo Child who performs various spiritual
feats, such as mediumship, healing, telepathy and other psychic abilities, as
she travels with her grandfather (played by Walsch) and brings her estranged
family back together. Carroll and Tober assert that “The storyline never specif-
ically revealed that the protagonist was an Indigo Child, but the marketing and
the title were obviously meant to take advantage of the growing awareness of
Indigo kids.”58 Twyman, in the description of the film, states that: “Indigo chil-
dren and their ability to communicate in unique ways with each other, heal, and
even foresee events, are well documented. This inspirational film … serves as an
affirmation of spiritual principles universal to all mankind.”59 Twyman, through
these films, has employed two forms of this powerful medium: dramatic


 57. Indigo.
 58. Carroll & Tober, The Indigo Children 10 Years Later, 4.
 59. Twyman, “Movies”.

                                                                              363
daniel kline