From the outset, we should note that Scientology is not exactly an eso-
teric organization in the traditional sense, comparable with fraternal orders
such as Freemasonry or magical groups such as the Golden Dawn. Many of
Scientology’s secrets, we will see, have had less to do with transmitting eso-
teric gnosis than with preserving the Church, its wealth and its power, often
in hostile social and political contexts. However, Scientology did develop an
elaborate esoteric hierarchy of training levels, a complex esoteric cosmology
and a very tight system of information control that rivals (if not surpasses)
that of any other Western esoteric tradition.
   As such, I will argue, the Church of Scientology is a striking example of the
fact that religious secrecy is typically not just a matter of esoteric gnosis with

   5. See Urban, “Fair Game”; Cowan, “Researching Scientology”.
   6. Brill & Packard, “Silencing Scientology’s Critics on the Internet”, 5–8. See Urban, “Fair
      Game”; Raine, “Surveillance in a New Religious Movement”.


182
                                                               the secrets of scientology



no connection to the broader social and political domain. On the contrary, it
is often intimately entwined with politics, power, social struggle, and histori-
cal change. Perhaps most important, Scientology offers profound insight into
what I call the dual nature of secrecy – its role both as a source of symbolic
power and a potential liability for its owner. As the sociologist Georg Simmel
famously observed, secrecy can serve as a kind of “adorning possession” for
its owner;7 like fine clothing or jewellery, esoteric knowledge can ironically
enhance the status of its owner precisely by virtue of what it conceals. Yet, at
the same time, secrecy can also bring even more suspicion, scrutiny and attack
from critics, opponents and government agencies who see such concealment
as a potential threat; and, in turn, increasing government scrutiny tends to
foster even more elaborate tactics of concealment, obfuscation and dissimula-
tion on the part of the religious organization.8 It is just this sort of spiralling
feedback loop of secrecy, surveillance, government scrutiny and increasing
dissimulation that we see in the tangled history of the Church of Scientology
over the last sixty years. As such, it offers some profound insights into the role
of secrecy, surveillance and information control in the twenty-first century.


THE OCCULT ROOTS OF SCIENTOLOGY? ESOTERIC THEMES
IN HUBBARD’S EARLY LIFE AND WRITINGS

Secrecy surrounds many aspects of the Church of Scientology, beginning with
the biography of its founder, L. Ron Hubbard himself. According to official
narratives promoted by the Church to this day, Hubbard was a unique combi-
nation of rugged explorer, world traveller and engineer, equally accomplished
as “a daredevil barnstormer, a master mariner, [and] a Far East explorer”, as
well as the founder of a revolutionary new religious philosophy.9 Born in
Nebraska in 1911, Hubbard claims to have been initiated by Blackfoot sha-
mans in Montana, then to have travelled widely in Asia and learned the
secrets of Eastern sages, Buddhist priests and “the last remaining magician
from the line of Kublai Khan’s court”.10 Back in the United States, he pursued
the sciences, studying engineering and atomic physics at George Washington
University, before enjoying a decorated naval career during World War II.
   Virtually every detail of Hubbard’s life narrative, however, has been the
subject of debate, and many critics have argued that most, if not all, of his
official biography is a fabrication. Indeed, after reviewing the large body of
biographical materials produced in the lawsuit of The Church of Scientology


   7. Simmel, “The Secret and the Secret Society”, 337.
   8. See Simmel, “The Secret and the Secret Society”; Urban, “Secrecy in New Religious Move­
      ments”; Tefft, The Dialectics of Secret Society Power.
   9. Friends of Ron, L. Ron Hubbard, 102.
 10. Scientology.org, “L. Ron Hubbard”.


                                                                                        183
hugh b . urban



of California v. Gerald Armstrong in 1984, Judge Paul Breckenridge was led to
conclude that “the evidence portrays a man who has been virtually a patho-
logical liar when it comes to his history, background, and achievements”.11 As
Dorthe Refslund Christensen suggests, however, Hubbard’s biography is per-
haps best understood not as a factual account at all, but rather as a kind of
“hagiographic mythology”;12 as such, it is not dissimilar to the hagiographic
biographies of founders of other esoteric traditions and new religions, such as
Madame Blavatsky or Joseph Smith.
    Perhaps the most controversial chapter in Hubbard’s biography was his
involvement in occultism and ritual magic in California during the late 1940s.
This rather bizarre story is far too complex to do justice in a short article, so
interested readers may look at some of my and others’ works where this curi-
ous tale is related in more detail.13
    After leaving the Navy following World War II, Hubbard moved to
Pasadena, California, where he befriended one of the most enigmatic occult-
ists of twentieth-century America, John (Jack) Whiteside Parsons. In addition
to being one of the most prominent rocket scientists of his day (with a crater
on the moon named after him), Parsons was also an avid disciple of the infa-
mous British magus, Aleister Crowley (1875–1947) – the self-styled “Great
Beast 666” – who is arguably the most important figure in the revival of magic,
neopaganism and occultism in the twentieth century. Parsons was an initiate
in Crowley’s highly esoteric group, the Ordo Templi Orientis, and immersed
in its most secret and dangerous rituals. Sharing his interest in science fiction
and magic, Hubbard became Parsons’s close friend and a partner in his eso-
teric magical rites.14
    According to Parsons’s detailed record of this period, entitled “The Book
of Babalon”, he was engaged in a series of esoteric rituals based on Crowley’s
magic and the concept of the “moonchild”. The aim of Parsons’s “Babalon
Working” was first to identify a female partner who would serve as his
partner in sexual rituals; the partner would then become the vessel for the
“magickal child” or “moonchild”, a supernatural offspring that would be the
embodiment of ultimate power: indeed, this child would be “mightier than
all the kings of the Earth”.15 Impressed by Hubbard’s natural magical abilities,
despite his lack of any formal training, Parsons made Hubbard an intimate
participant in the Babalon Working, and even his “Scribe”, who served as the
voice for Babalon herself during the rites. According to Parsons’s account
of 2–3 March 1946, Hubbard channelled the voice of Babalon, speaking as
the beautiful but terrible lady who is “flame of life, power of darkness, she


 11.   Breckenridge, “Decision”.
 12.   Christensen, “Inventing L. Ron Hubbard”, 227–58.
 13.   Urban, “The Occult Roots of Scientology?”; Pendle, Strange Angel; Carter, Sex and Rockets.
 14.   Carter, Sex and Rockets, 150.
 15.   Ibid., 150.


184
                                                                the secrets of scientology



destroys with a glance, she may take thy soul. She feeds upon the death of
men. Beautiful–Horrible.”16
  Apparently, Parsons believed that the rituals had been successful. Thus, on
6 March, he wrote excitedly to Crowley:

       I have been in direct touch with One who is most Holy and
       Beautiful … First, instructions were received direct through Ron,
       the seer … I am to act as instructor guardian guide for nine months;
       then it will be loosed on the world.17

In short, Parsons believed that he had successfully “conceived” a supernatural
being, who would then gestate for nine months before being born into the
world. Ironically, however, Crowley himself was by no means approving when
he learned of the ritual activities of Parsons and Hubbard. On the contrary, he
seems to have been quite upset, writing in April 1946: “Apparently Parsons or
Hubbard or somebody is producing a Moonchild. I get fairly frantic when I
contemplate the idiocy of these goats.”18
   The magical collaboration between Parsons and Hubbard was short-lived,
however, and Parsons would never see his dream of the moonchild fulfilled. In
1946, Hubbard, Parsons and Parsons’s former girlfriend, Betty, formed a part-
nership called Allied Enterprises. Their scheme was to purchase yachts on the
US East Coast, sail them to California and then sell them for a profit. Parsons
put up $20,970.80, almost the entirety of his life’s savings, while Hubbard put
up a mere $1,183.91. Upon hearing of the scheme, Crowley himself suspected
that Hubbard was playing Parsons for a fool and planning to betray him. In
a cable he wrote: “Suspect Ron ­playing ­confidence trick – Jack Parsons weak
fool – obvious victim prowling swindlers.”19 Finally, Parsons concluded that
Hubbard had stolen not just his girlfriend but all his money and so chased him
down in Miami. As Hubbard and Betty attempted to flee on one of the yachts,
Parsons performed a ritual curse involving the “invocation of Bartzabel”,
the spirit of Mars. Curiously enough, a sudden squall came up and forced
Hubbard’s ship back to port.20
   Perhaps the most remarkable part of this whole story about Hubbard,
Parsons and secret sexual rites is that the Church of Scientology admits that
all of this did happen. In October 1969, the Sunday Times in London pub-
lished an article that documented Hubbard’s links to Parsons and Crowley;
the Church promptly threatened legal action and forced the Times to pay an
out-of-court settlement. Scientology then published a statement in the Times