As is evident by the greeting, the makers of the temple equate the viewing of
the virtual temple as equivalent to seeing the temple in the physical world, at
least to some degree.
   Not surprisingly, neopagans, New Age practitioners and occultists have
also established presences in Second Life. Following the pattern of earlier for-
mats, cybercovens have been established, but unlike previous versions this
technology allows a full manifestation of the romantic imagery associated
with neopaganism. One cybercoven, called Covenstead, consists of a massive
digital campus with multiple parts, including a pub for drinking cyber-mead,
dancing and playing trivia, a library with digital versions of magical and neo­
pagan texts, a marketplace to purchase various virtual clothes and objects for
use by the avatar, a large field for group meditation, a Stonehenge setting used
for community ritual (complete with altar and central bonfire), and more.
There is also a digital carriage ride so one’s avatar can tour the campus, as
well as multiple teleports that can whisk one’s avatar to different places on the
campus without the need to walk or fly there.
   However, for many Covenstead members, Second Life is not just a place for
community. They view their participation in it, especially during ritual, as a
form of astral travel. Unlike Ingalls and her group of occultists who travel to a
distant temple and perform their rituals separately, these neopagans, who are
spread throughout the world, come together in their cyberastral Stonehenge
temple to celebrate neopagan religious events. In June of 2009, I interviewed
some members of Covenstead and observed the celebration of one of their
online sabbaths. The cybercoven was created by Ainsley Weatherwax69 and is


 67. Radde-Antweiler, “‘Virtual Religion’”.
 68. Ibid., 177.
 69. All names given for participants are avatar pseudonyms. In some cases the participants
     gave their real names and personal details, but in most cases they preferred to simply use
     their avatar’s identity for the interview. Those who did give their physical world location


176
                                         accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



operated by her and a number of volunteers who contribute time and money
for the continuation and maintenance of the cybercoven. When discussing
the community with Weatherwax, she noted that as a cybercoven “the com-
munity expects to be able to be themselves among other Pagans and to have
classes, rituals and events offered”.70 One of the ways they coordinate their
schedule is by using an online calendaring system where event titles, descrip-
tions, and times are posted. As individuals from around the world participate,
all the times are standardized on Pacific Standard Time. She also noted that
most of the participants were from North America and Europe, and that the
events were generally conducted in English.
    When our discussion turned to cyber-ritual, she noted that there were pos-
itive and negative aspects regarding its performance in Second Life. She men-
tioned that some of the technical limitations for Second Life hampered the
performance of ritual. With more participants, there is a greater lag time for
the animation and this disturbed the semblance of the ritual. She also said that
there were conceptual difficulties with cyber-rituals. Mirroring the cultural
transference noted by Murray and Sixsmith, Weatherwax stated that many
participants bring their experiences with ritual in the physical world into
Second Life. Moreover, she said that the negotiation of ritual in Second Life
is ongoing: “I see ritual in Cyberspace as a work in progress. No one seems to
really know what works best yet.” She continued:

      We need to experiment to find out what works in Cyberspace best.
      And a lot of people seem so mired in the trappings of RL [real
      life] traditions in ritual they aren’t willing to let go of them to dis-
      cover what really works. I see cyberspace as an amazing vehicle for
      magic. SL [Second Life] could be even more so with its amazing
      graphic creation capabilities. … These could add amazing dimen-
      sion to [what] was once just “chatroom” ritual. And if you have a
      totally hearing crowd, the ability to add voice and sound to the
      imagery is wonderful. … The ritual should fit what is available.
      Imagination plays [a part in] all of it. So why should we force our
      avatars into human shapes to do human gestures for ritual when
      this is obviously not a necessity in cyberspace? We could do the
      whole ritual in colour and light and pure visual effect. [This] might
      work much better. The environs always dictated ritual in RL, so
      perhaps different environs should dictate different ritual technique

     were located in the United States and Canada. No formal questions were prearranged but
     the general nature of the discussion, goals for the interview and the physical world identity
     of the interviewer was given to the participant prior to their agreeing to be interviewed.
     Thus each interview began at a similar starting point but went in the direction generally
     determined by the interviewee. For issues regarding virtual ethnography see Christine
     Hine, Virtual Ethnography; Hine, Virtual Methods.
 70. Interview by author, 13 June 2009.

                                                                                             177
john l . crow



        … I think imagination can get around mostly anything and elec-
        tricity has always been an amazing channel for spiritual energy. We
        might actually find a way to use it [Second Life] that will exceed
        our results in RL.71

Clearly Weatherwax notes the limitations of cyber-ritual. Not surprisingly, she
is not one who sees Second Life as synonymous with the astral. She also men-
tions the limits the physical body introduces to the performance of the cyber-
ritual. In general the cybercoven desires to be inclusive during its ritual and
thus does not use voice but instead uses text to deliver speech as it is inclusive
of the hearing impaired. Although it is not the case for all the participants, this
limits the ability for some to feel completely immersed in cyber-ritual.
    One participant, Tamaya Rayna, claimed that she did understand her par-
ticipation in Second Life as being like the astral plane: “My thought on that is,
if I am actually a spirit being, then my ‘physical’ body is a form of an avatar. If
we are doing energy work on the astral or other planes, I am just using a dif-
ferent kind of avatar to identify with.”72 Cartesian dualism underlies Rayna’s
language, mirroring the language used by nineteenth-century occultists. Later
in the conversation she added that “Part of magical training and practice is
learning to focus and feel the energies. … I can get that sense either in SL or
RL. My theory is that whether I am in physical proximity to a person or not,
I can still sense their energy.” Rayna’s language here parallels Ingall’s and her
astral ritual on Moonbase Temple. Another participant who saw Second Life
as a form of the astral was Jimmy Orsini. He also claimed to feel the ener-
gies of others while in ritual,73 and, moreover, saw his laptop as a ritual object
to enter the cyberastral, much like nineteenth-century occultists used magic
mirrors and crystal balls. While participating in cyber-ritual, Orsini, who is a
solitary pagan, places his laptop on his altar with other ritual objects. “I usu-
ally sit in front of my altar and light a candle during the rituals”,74 Orsini says.
He also notes that he uses the scripts and chants of others during the ritual
to build energies to connect with other participants. The use of the computer
as a ritual object is becoming more common with neopagans. As the com-
plexity of the device exceeds the knowledge of the user, the device becomes
opaque and unpredictable. This opacity opens up the opportunity for enchant-
ment whereby the laptop becomes an object for ritual.75 As Aupers comments,
“Magic and (computer) technology are not mutually exclusive and, more than
that, technological progress may paradoxically be responsible for the growth
and flowering of mystery and magic in the late modern world.”76

 71.   Ibid.
 72.   Interview by author, 15 June 2009.
 73.   Interview by author, 12 June 2009.
 74.   Ibid.
 75.   Aupers, “‘Where the Zeros Meet the Ones’”, 234–5.
 76.   Ibid. 237.

178
                                            accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse