public prominence”, as the original decline proposed by secularization the-
orists has been put into question, but more with “a revision of a previously
over-confidently secularist outlook”.52 Theorizing the post-­secular thus deals
with “the limits of the secularization thesis”.53 One could say that the post-
secular relates more to changes in perceptions regarding religion, among
scholars and laypeople alike, than to grand-scale societal transformations in
themselves.54 This relates directly to changes in Habermas’s own views on reli-
gion and the societal role of it.55 It was in what Harrington calls a third phase
in Habermas’s thinking, “anticipated in the book Postmetaphysical Thinking
of 1988”, that he turned from being a devoted secularist to appreciating the
importance of religion.56 Concerning the relations between the secular and the
religious, Habermas writes:

      [T]he religious side must accept the authority of “natural” rea-
      son as the fallible results of the institutionalized sciences and the
      basic principles of universalistic egalitarianism in law and morality.
      Conversely, secular reason may not set itself up as the judge con-
      cerning truths of faith.57

Thus, both religious and secular actors need to acknowledge each others’
rights to participate in societal and political life.58 However, Habermas con-
tinues by noting that secular actors “can accept as reasonable only what it can
translate into its own, in principle universally accessible, discourses”.59 Even
though the secular state must allow a place for religion,60 it is apparent here
that the roles provided for religion and the secular are not equal. In effect, the
religious is expected to speak with a secular voice and operate in the secu-
lar realm on the premises of the latter, and this betrays a secularist agenda


 52. Harrington, “Habermas and the ‘Post-Secular Society’”, 547.
 53. Beaumont, “Transcending the Particular in Postsecular Cities”, 6.
 54. These changes in perception of course change religion itself, as religious actors adapt to
     their new roles in the public sphere, see Knott, “Cutting Through the Postsecular City”, 34.
 55. As an example, Habermas has come to regularly engage in debate with religious repre-
     sentatives. See Ratzinger & Habermas, The Dialectics of Secularization; Habermas et al.,
     An Awareness of What is Missing. For more on this see Dillon, “Can Post-Secular Society
     Tolerate Religious Differences?”, 144–5.
 56. Harrington, “Habermas and the ‘Post-Secular Society’”, 544.
 57. Habermas, “An Awareness of What is Missing”, 16. Natural reason refers to “[t]he assump-
     tion of a common human reason” which makes a non-religious secular state feasible by rely-
     ing on “public arguments to which supposedly all persons have equal access”, Habermas,
     “Religion in the Public Sphere”, 4 (cf. 9–10).
 58. Habermas, “Notes on Post-Secular Society”, 22–3; Habermas, “Religion in the Public
     Sphere”, 4–6.
 59. Habermas, “An Awareness of What is Missing”, 16. Cf. Habermas, “Notes on Post-Secular
     Society”, 28; Dillon, “Can Post-Secular Society Tolerate Religious Differences?”, 146.
 60. Habermas, “Religion in the Public Sphere”, 7.


318
                  the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



on the behalf of Habermas.61 He drives the point further by saying that “the
content of religion must open itself up to the normatively grounded expecta-
tion that it should recognize for reasons of its own the neutrality of the state
towards worldviews, the equal freedom of all religious communities, and the
independence of the institutionalized sciences”.62
   Habermas’s (and subsequently others’) discussion of religion involves sim-
ilar problems as many secularization theories. For example, a thoroughly
intellectualized understanding of religion is often involved,63 with a focus on
concepts such as “belief ”, “faith” and “convictions”.64 Habermas also makes
what can be conceived as artificial distinctions between religious and secular
citizens, where an individual can only be one or the other.65 A second problem
in Habermas’s writing is that he, as a social philosopher, is not really describ-
ing an existing situation, but rather presenting ideals for the relation between
the secular state and religious institutions. Connected to this is Habermas’s
hugely influential politicized understanding of “the public sphere”. Religion in
the public sphere thus implies the political importance of religion, primarily
evident in the various religious fundamentalisms around the globe.66 I feel that
in order to grasp societal life more holistically – and as relating political life
only to official political institutions is limited and artificial – the meaning of
“public sphere” needs to be broadened to include at least mass media and pop-
ular culture.67
   The post-secular is a central theme in the Åbo Akademi University Centre
of Excellence research project Post-Secular Culture and a Changing Religious
Landscape in Finland (PCCR).68 In contrast to many other approaches to
the post-secular, the aim in PCCR is to provide empirical examination, and
to this effect a loose working definition has been developed. The four mutu-
ally dependent points of the definition mention changes in the understanding
of the term “religion” itself, an increase in the awareness and public visibil-
ity of religion, changes in the power relations between religious and other


 61. See Casanova, “Religion, European Secular Identities, and European Integration”, 92n7;
     Dillon, “Can Post-Secular Society Tolerate Religious Differences?”, 148.
 62. Habermas, “An Awareness of What is Missing”, 21.
 63. Moberg & Granholm, “The Concept of the Post-Secular”. See also Dillon, “Can Post-Secular
     Society Tolerate Religious Differences?”, 146–7.
 64. Habermas, “Religion in the Public Sphere”, 8.
 65. See Dillon, “Can Post-Secular Society Tolerate Religious Differences?”, 148.
 66. Habermas, “Religion in the Public Sphere”, 1.
 67. See Moberg & Granholm, “The Concept of the Post-Secular”. It should be noted, however,
     that Habermas already in the 1960s discussed the “hijacking” of the public sphere by the
     mass media and the change of its meaning in this process; see Habermas, The Structural
     Transformation of the Public Sphere, 2.
 68. The PCCR project started in 2010 and is led by Professor Peter Nynäs. The definition is dis-
     cussed on the basis of an internal methodological document developed within the research
     group, of which I am a member.


                                                                                            319
kennet granholm



i­nstitutions, and transformations in the environments of religion which in
 turn inform the shaping of new religious subjectivities. This is all set in the
 context of “profound macro-level transformations in the global political econ-
 omy” since the 1980s, and the accompanying increase in “global interconnect-
 edness of national societies with regard to economy, politics, culture, media,
 and populations”. In this perspective, the post-secular does relate to large-scale
 transformations on both societal and organizational levels, but these transfor-
 mations are intimately linked to and dependent on changing perceptions of
 religion.
    Looking at the post-secular through discourse theory, and linking it to a
 discursive understanding of secularization, brings interesting new dimensions
 to the discussion. If secularization theory is bound in secularist discourses,
 then the post-secular can be regarded as discursive formations which signal
 the, at least partial, societal breaking up of the hegemony of secularism. These
 post-secular discourses are themselves heavily indebted to an awareness of the
 earlier hegemonic position of secularism. A discursive approach also brings
 to the front, as per the PCCR definition discussed above, the awareness that
 more religion is perceived at least in part due to the broadened understand-
 ing of the term religion itself. Just as secularization theories are dependent
 on secularist discourses and help bring into being what is described, so post-
 secular discourses are not simply neutral descriptions of “how things are”. In
 seeing religion in new ways, and in according it new (or renewed) roles and
 functions, we are actively engaged in producing this new reality.
    Scholars are not separated from this process in some way. In fact, we are
 on the forefront of it, just as the sociologists of a century or so ago were key
 actors in secularist discourse. This whole situation need not be a problem.
 At least to some degree, “finding what we are looking for” is an unavoidable
 aspect of scholarly inquiry, and thinking that it is not does not insulate from
 this fact. It does, however, mean that we as scholars should be aware of what
 we are doing when we are projecting “the post-secular condition”. We should
 not just naïvely describe “the new post-secular reality” as a simple fact. The
 errors of the secularization paradigm need not be repeated.
    While keeping this caveat in mind, the post-secular is very interesting from
 at least two standpoints. This emerging discourse is not limited to scholarly
 discussions, but does represent a broader societal phenomenon. This means
 that religion is indeed acquiring new and changed roles and functions, as
 well as a renewed visibility in the public sphere. We are thus witnessing some
 major transformations on the religious field of the West. Even with us scholars
 playing a part in producing this reality and these changes, the new perspec-
 tives provide us with new and interesting ways of advancing a field which has
 become somewhat stagnant. In short, it allows us to escape “old-school” ways
 of looking at religion where the conventional religious institution is more or
 less the only “right” arena for it, and where theological orthodoxy is awarded
 primacy when it comes to describing what a particular religion “really” is.

320
                  the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



SECULARIZATION AND “THE POST-SECULAR CONDITION”:
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ESOTERIC