One of the most characteristic elements of the counterculture was
      the widespread use of psychedelic drugs. It has often been noted
      that most of the New Religious Movements which enjoyed their
      heyday in the wake of the counterculture (late 1960s and early
      1970s) strongly discouraged or flatly forbade the use of drugs.
      Instead, they emphasized meditation and other spiritual tech-
      niques as alternative means of expanding consciousness. This same
      approach has become typical for the New Age movement of the
      1980s, which no longer encourages the use of psychedelic drugs as
      part of its religious practices.11

Rereading this passage fifteen years later, I must confess that I find it rather
naïve. In my book I analysed the beliefs and ideas of the New Age on the basis
of a representative sample of primary sources, and found almost no evidence
for the relevance of psychedelics. However, I should have been more sensitive
to the social and discursive necessity for New Age authors to be discreet or
secretive about the role that psychoactives might have played in their life and
work, particularly after LSD and other psychedelic substances were criminal-
ized during the second half of the 1960s. A good example is the famous case
of Fritjof Capra. His bestseller The Tao of Physics (1975) begins with an oft-
quoted description of the experience that had set him on the course towards
writing his book. Capra described how, one late summer afternoon in 1969,
he was sitting by the ocean and suddenly became aware of his whole environ-
ment as “being engaged in a gigantic cosmic dance”:

      I “saw” cascades of energy coming down from outer space, in
      which particles were created and destroyed in rhythmic pulses; I
      “saw” the atoms of the elements and those of my body participat-
      ing in this cosmic dance of energy; I felt its rhythm and I “heard” its
      sound, and at that moment I knew that this was the Dance of Shiva,
      the Lord of Dancers worshipped by the Hindus.12

Capra may have found it preferable to have his readers assume that this expe-
rience happened to him “just like that”; but the description is of such a nature
that, especially coming from the pen of a typical representative of the hippie

 11. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 11.
 12. Capra, Tao of Physics, 11.


396
                                                                 entheogenic esotericism



generation, we may safely assume that it occurred under the influence of LSD
or some other psychedelic substance.13 It revealed to Capra that spirit and
matter were not radically separate, and eventually led him to explore the par-
allels and mutual interpenetration of modern physics and Eastern mysticism.
   In going through my sample of New Age sources, I came across countless
other descriptions of impressive “mystical” or visionary experiences. Many
authors described them as crucial turning points in their spiritual develop-
ment, and emphasized (like Capra) that they had provided them with essential
knowledge about the true nature of reality. The case of Jane Roberts, author of
the bestselling Seth books and arguably the most influential source of basic
New Age metaphysics,14 may be used here as one more representative exam-
ple. According to her own account, published in 1970, her first exposure to
“spiritual” reality occurred out of the blue on the afternoon of 9 September
1963, when she was quietly sitting at the dinner table:

     Between one normal minute and the next, a fantastic avalanche of
     radical, new ideas burst into my head with tremendous force, as if
     my skull were some sort of receiving station, turned up to unbear-
     able volume. Not only ideas came through this ­channel, but sensa-
     tions, intensified and pulsating … It was as if the physical world
     were suddenly tissue-paper thin, hiding infinite dimensions of real-
     ity, and I was suddenly flung through the tissue paper with a huge
     ripping sound. My body sat at the table, my hands furiously scrib-
     bling down the words and ideas that flashed through my head. Yet
     I seemed to be somewhere else, at the same time, traveling through
     things. I went plummeting through a leaf, to find a whole universe
     open up; and then out again, drawn into new perspectives.
        I felt as if knowledge was being implanted in the very cells of
     my body so that I couldn’t forget it – a gut knowing, a biological
     spirituality. It was feeling and knowing, rather than intellectual
     knowledge … When I came to, I found myself scrawling what was
     obviously meant as the title of that odd batch of notes: The Physical
     Universe as Idea Construction. Later the Seth Material would
     develop those ideas, but I didn’t know that at the time.15

Everything in this description suggests a psychedelic experience, yet nowhere
in her published writings does Jane Roberts mention any instances of experi-
mentation with LSD, mescalin, DMT or other substances that were available


13. Capra does not mention LSD, but does refer to the powerful impact of his experiences with
    unspecified “power plants” (see Ibid., 12).
14. Hanegraaff, “Roberts, Dorothy Jane”, 999, with reference to my extensive analyses of her
    writings in Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture.
15. Jane Roberts, The Seth Material, 11–12.


                                                                                        397
wouter j . hanegraaff



and widely publicized at the time. Her official account should be compared
with the notes in her unpublished journal, now at Yale University. Just two
weeks before, on 23 August 1963, she noted that she and her husband had
“both become very interested in ESP and parapsychology”, and for 9 September
we read only this: “Strange, try to be cautious – but seem to have hit upon new
thought-system. My definition of time is original – I think will have a lot of
work to do on it”. One month later, on 10 October, she noted: “‘Physical World
as IDEA construction’ began today”.16 These scanty notes seem to suggest that
this manuscript was not in fact the result of automatic writing, but a deliber-
ate writing project started a month after the breakthrough experience.
   As suggested by the cases of Capra and Roberts, it would be naïve to simply
believe the authors of influential New Age publications at their word when
they write that such experiences happened to them “just like that”, especially
after the start of criminalization. It is obvious that neither they nor their pub-
lishers had anything to gain from acknowledging the role that psycho­actives
may have played in their spiritual development: if you wish to convince a
general readership that the universe revealed its true nature to you, that you
found yourself communicating with superior spiritual entities on other planes
of reality, or saw spectacular visions of other worlds, it just does not help
your credibility to tell them that it all happened while you were tripping on
acid! Nevertheless, most scholars of New Age – with the notable exception of
Christopher Partridge (see below) – seem to have made the same assumptions
that I made in 1996. J. Gordon Melton’s New Age Encyclopedia from 1990 and
Christoph Bochinger’s 700-page monograph on the New Age (1994) made no
reference at all to “drugs” or “psychedelics”; Paul Heelas’s study of 1996 men-
tioned them only in passing; and they are entirely absent from Daren Kemp
and James R. Lewis’s recent multi-author Handbook of New Age (2007). In the
pioneering volume Perspectives on the New Age, edited by Melton together
with James R. Lewis, only one author said at least something about it: in her
research on the Ananda World Brotherhood Village, Susan Love Brown noted
that many of its members had evolved from an initial use of drugs towards an
emphasis on drugless techniques such as meditation.17 Michael York’s Emerging
Network (1995) emphasized the same point, quoting Marilyn Ferguson’s 1980
bestseller: “The annals of the Aquarian Conspiracy are full of accounts of pas-
sage: LSD to Zen, LSD to India, psilocybin to Psychosynthesis”.18 Evincing a

 16. Jane Roberts, “Journal”. Note that Roberts’s notes about the murder of President Kennedy,
     later that year, are much longer and evince much more bewilderment and emotion.
 17. Susan Love Brown, “Baby Boomers, American Character, and the New Age”, 89, 94–5.
 18. York, The Emerging Network, 50; see also 111 and 181 about the neopagans Starhawk
     and Margot Adler. In Adler’s 1985 questionnaire among pagans, fifty-six respondents are
     quoted as responding “never, never, ever, ever use drugs” (certainly not a formulation used
     identically by all of them), but 76% of her sample responded that it was a matter of personal
     choice because such substances were “occasionally very valuable”, and thirteen respondents
     saw them as “a powerful tool” if used in a sacred context.


398
                                                                  entheogenic esotericism