what he calls (based on the sociologies of Georg Simmel and Pierre Bourdieu)
“the dual nature of secrecy” – its double role as both a source of symbolic
power and a potential liability for its owner.
   Returning to popular culture and occulture, esoteric orders and occult cur-
rents are usual suspects in conspiracy theories, whether it be the witches’
Sabbath, the Bavarian Illuminati, or secret networks of “Satanic ritual abusers”.
Online media outlets such as YouTube and specially created “news sites” and
discussion forums are currently seething with conspiratorial ideas. In “Hidden
Knowledge, Hidden Powers” (Chapter 10), Asbjørn Dyrendal considers multi-
ple relations between esoteric discourse and ­conspiracy theory in contempo-
rary occulture. While conspiracy theories about the esoteric are relatively well
known, Dyrendal goes on to consider the considerably less researched area of
conspiracy theories in esoteric movements, and discusses the possibility (and
utility) of analysing conspiracy theory as esoteric discourse. The discussion
follows three thematic axes, namely the role of history, agency and knowledge
in conspiratorial and esoteric discourses. The role of history highlights con-
spiracy theories’ function as apocalyptic mythologies of evil, focusing on their
construction of secret societies and hidden chains of power through history.
Revealing secret history leads to a focus on the nature of knowledge, how it is
constructed and what its function is in these mythologies. Hidden knowledge
about secret agents (of formidable power) furthermore brings in the question
of agency, particularly how the possession of secretive knowledge increases
power. Dyrendal proposes that these topics are good starting points not only
for considering conspiracy theories about and in esoteric movements, but also
suggests that they provide questions for whether, and in what sense, it may
be useful to view conspiracy theory as esoteric discourse. These discussions
are carried out on the basis of a wealth of examples from sources as varied as
Rudolf Steiner (and his later interpreters), Anton LaVey, Discordianism, and
the explicit conspiracy theorists Jim Marrs and David Icke.


Esoteric transfers

Part III of the volume deals with the impact and influence of esoteric dis-
courses, currents and notions on cultural and societal fields, which are com-
monly regarded as “non-esoteric”. One of the analytically most powerful
capabilities of the concept of the esoteric is its ability to shine light on the
“betwixt and between” (i.e. phenomena that transgress the seemingly imper-
meable border between the religious and the secular). That there has histori-
cally been a fluid area between these two fields is evident by such activities as
alchemy and astrology, both of which have played important roles in religious
fields as well as in “non-religious” ones such as experimental science, medi-
cine, and politics. Isaac Newton (1643–1727), who was both an alchemist and
the greatest physicist of his age, is an even more ­illuminating example of how

14
                                                                        introduction



these fields can interconnect without, it should be noted, internal paradox.
While the hegemonic understanding is that the modern era is characterized
by such a decisive divide, even if the past was not, the chapters in this section
suggest that this is not necessarily the case, or at the very least that it is a truth
in serious need of modification.
   In “Discursive Transfers and Reconfigurations” (Chapter 11), Kocku von
Stuckrad continues his project of recasting the study of the esoteric from a
specialist field to dealing with the European history of religion and culture in
a more general sense. From discussing the contemporary erosion of the secu-
larization paradigm, von Stuckrad moves on to consider four central trans-
formations, or reconfigurations, of the “religious field of discourse”. These are:

   • “Communitarization” – the emergence of new and diverse forms of
     community, and ideas of community, since the nineteenth century.
   • “Scientification” – the professionalization of knowledge claims, as well as
     the overall hegemony of scientific (or scientificized) knowledge.
   • “Aestheticization” – a redefinition of the religious in terms of, for exam-
     ple, emotion and experience as a response to Enlightenment rationaliza-
     tion, providing a new role for it.
   • “Public activation” – the “emergence of a public space that is significantly
     different from earlier forms of public communication”, and the “re-entry”
     of the religious in the secular public arena.

All these developments are highly visible in, and strongly affect, scholarly dis-
course, rather than being “objectively separated” from it. Von Stuckrad dem-
onstrates his perspective by looking at how esoteric discourse can be found
in recent (seemingly) secular discussion. The example provided is the human
genome project, which has been given an esoteric dimension by several com-
mentators and participants, discussing genes as “code”, the revelation of which
provides humanity with “the language of God”.
   The theme of politics runs as a red thread through the contributions in this
section. Von Stuckrad’s article deals with cultural politics reframing the soci-
etal role and location of the religious, but also with “politics of science” adapt-
ing to allow for religious vocabulary. The theme of politics is, however, more
explicit in the rest of the chapters of the section.
   “What do esoteric phenomena such as Chaos Magick, runic symbolism,
Tantric yoga, and the mythical Atlantis have to do with radical right-wing poli-
tics?” With this question, Jacob Senholt opens Chapter 12, on “Radical Politics
and Political Esotericism” (i.e. the transfers between esoteric discourse and the
multifaceted milieus of contemporary right-wing ideological formations). After
providing an overview of the many and well-documented historical links that
exist between esotericism and right-wing politics up until the middle of the
twentieth century, Senholt notes how special aesthetic and mythical connec-
tions were forged after World War II, fuelling popular culture and ­influencing

                                                                                   15
egil asprem and kennet granholm



new political and esoteric formations. While the connections between eso-
tericism and the right are relatively well known, Senholt attempts to provide
some answers to a question that has remained surprisingly little discussed: why
do we see this overlap? In order to address this question, Senholt focuses on
three ideological formations in contemporary right-wing politics: the Euro­
pean New Right, Radical Traditionalism, and Eurasianism. Considering recent
­theories that connect esotericism to polemical discourse, countercultural
 movements, and particularly processes of exclusion and “Othering” grounded
 in European cultural history, Senholt finds a tentative answer in shared polem-
 icized constructions of history, and narratives of cultural decline and oppo-
 sition. He suggests that what Wouter Hanegraaff once called the “Grand
 Polemical Narrative” (i.e. a process which has constructed and reified “esoteri-
 cism” by a series of polemical exclusions grounded in the battle against “pagan-
 ism”) simultaneously gave rise to counter-narratives, questioning Christian
 monotheism as well as the intellectual traditions of the Enlighten­ment. These
 counter-narratives create some striking affinities between the esoteric and the
 radical right, which may help account for the overlaps.
     Moving from one form of radical politics to another, in Chapter 13 Eduard
 ten Houten examines the unlikely points of connection between “New Age
 Spirituality and Islamic Jihad”. The focus is on the curious story of how a
 popular “New Age” inspirational book became a handbook for revolution-
 ary Islamists in the context of the second Chechen war. The Manual of the
 Warrior of Light (1997) was written by the bestselling author Paulo Coelho
 as a spiritual guide accompanying fictional works such as The Alchemist, The
 Pilgrimage and The Valkyries. It has been called a “key” to Coelho’s “ideological
 world”, and alleged to have “the same importance for him as the Red Book had
 for Mao or the Green Book for Gaddafi”. In the hands of Chechen freedom-
 fighter (or terrorist, depending on the perspective) Shamil Basayev, Coelho’s
 vague spiritual message to the affluent middle classes took on concrete mean-
 ing: the “New Age” manual became a call to arms against a physical oppressor
 – the Russians. Why would a Chechen mujahid be interested in the work of
 a Brazilian Catholic author of “spiritual” fiction? What is the link between the
 man best known for planning the Beslan school operation in North Ossetia
 in 2004 – taking 1100 hostages and ending in the deaths of 330 people, many
 of them children – and Coelho, who was appointed UN “Messenger of Peace”
 in 2007? Through comparison of the biographies of Coelho and Basayev, as
 well as the original Manual and Basayev’s modified “translation” from 2004,
 ten Houten shows how this at first sight surprising piece of reception history
 reveals ironic affinities which often remain hidden, but here are brought to the
 light of day.
     Moving to more grassroots political philosophy, Joseph Christian Greer
 examines “Deep Ecology and the Study of Western Esotericism” (Chapter 14).
 Greer criticizes earlier scholars who have uncritically connected Deep Ecology
 with the esoteric, as they in the process singularize the former. Instead, Deep

16
                                                                                 introduction