While many Afrocentric writers have a negative view of European civilization,
it is rare to find overtly racist sentiments against white people as individuals.
Still, within the Afrocentric movement we do find ideas that seem to mirror
white supremacist ideologies, and, just in the same manner, we do find that
these ideas sometimes interact with spiritual ones. We can find theories that
explain the need to “keep the race pure”, and ideas about magical possibilities
related to the “blood of the race”. In Afrocentricity, this is linked to ideas of
the function of the pigment melanin. One of the more famous and influential
examples of this idea can be found in the works of the American psycholo-
gist Frances Cress Welsing (b. 1935). In the 1970s Welsing presented what she
termed “The Cress Theory of Color-Confrontation and Racism”. According to
Karenga, she was influenced by the radical scholar Neeley Fuller’s Textbook for
Victims of White Supremacy (1969). Karenga makes specific reference to four
of Fuller’s points that serve as the foundation of Welsing’s theories. These are:

      1) White supremacy was the only functional racism; 2) all Third
      World peoples are victims of it; 3) racism is not merely an
      ­individual or institutional phenomena [sic], but a universal system
       of domination; and 4) that European theories and systems of politi-
       cal and economic organization are designed to establish, insure
       and expand white domination.55

Fuller’s ideas are in many ways a clear representation of ideas that were in
vogue among radical groups in the 1960s and 1970s, when solidarity with the
Third World and opposition to Western imperialism became a central issue
for different socialist movements. Welsing develops these ideas with a focus
on the colour of people.56 According to her, white supremacy could not be
explained by economic or social factors, but was rather based on an inferior-
ity complex that white people had. White people were lacking in colour, and
thus feared people of colour as their presence was a constant reminder of this

 54. Thorson, Rune Might, 17–20.
 55. Karenga, Introduction to Black Studies, 338.
 56. Welsing, The Isis Papers, 2.


                                                                              65
fredrik gregorius



lack. As the “white gene” was regressive, it also reminded them that they even-
tually would become annihilated. To prevent this annihilation a system was
established to keep the coloured races in place and white people dominant.
Evidence of white supremacy could in Welsing’s mind be seen throughout
society, from pool tables – where the white ball is used to strike all the col-
oured ones – to candy bars that represented the genitalia of black men which
white people secretly wanted to consume.57 Most of Welsing’s ideas were for-
mulated already in the 1970s, but it was with the publication of The Isis Papers
in 1991 that her influence became most notable.
   According to Welsing, white people are the result of a mutation. Origin­ally,
existence was peaceful in an African matriarchy, but this was disrupted by the
appearance of a genetic mutation: albinos. The mutants were expelled from
Africa due to their inferiority. Considering the recent violence against albinos
in parts of Africa, Welsing’s ideas appear all the more disturbing. In an inter-
view she explains the origin of the white race:

      Black people were the first people on the planet. … White peo-
      ple … lost the color through a genetic mutation to albinism, which
      genetics defines as a genetic deficiency state and they were forced
      out of Africa into Europe. Scientists who classify themselves as
      White don’t want to say [this]. You can’t simultaneously think
      White is superior and then say that White is a genetic deficiency
      state. I look at the system of racism having come into being con-
      sciously because the White population recognized, after they cir-
      cumnavigated the globe, that they were a tiny minority, fewer that
      [sic] one-tenth of the people on the planet. And they were genetic-
      recessive compared to the genetic dominance of people who pro-
      duce color. They realized that they could be genetically annihilated
      and White people could, as a collective of people, disappear. They
      worked out a system for White survival, which entails dominating
      all of the Black, Brown, Red and Yellow people on the planet. So
      racism is a behavioral system for the survival of White people.58

The system of white supremacy is, according to Welsing, based on controlling
the coloured population by keeping them psychologically chained and una-
ware of their potential. One effect of this is a psychological state where people
of colour feel inferior and regress to a childlike state, unaware of their inher-
ent power. This power gives the black person almost superhuman abilities and
Welsing theorizes that melanin even has magical qualities. As evidence for
this, she presents the Dogon tribes and their purported knowledge of the twin


 57. Ibid.
 58. Welsing, “Interviews with Dr Cress Welsing”.


66
                                                                              inventing africa



stars Sirius and Sirius B, which would require advanced instruments not avail-
able to the Dogon to observe.59 According to Welsing, they had this knowledge
due to their higher consciousness, which was in turn a result of their high level
of melanin. Furthermore, Sirius B is presented as in some way acting as a res-
ervoir of knowledge that people with high levels of melanin can tap into, as a
sort of “Akashic chronicle” available only to certain races.60
   While all people of colour are, in Welsing’s opinions, victims of white
supremacy, the particular focus is on black people. They are seen as a master
race among the coloured people. Welsing’s work has had a larger impact than
one might at first expect. Her books have sold several thousand copies and
have had a minor impact in popular culture with movies like John Singleton’s
Baby Boy (2001). References to her work, without mentions of her racism, can
even be found in the works of academic feminist writers such as Patricia Hill
Collins, who otherwise rejects most of the ideas found in Afrocentricity.61
   Melanin theory is a recurring black supremacy notion that can be found
in the Afrocentric milieu, even if most Afrocentrists do not place any greater
emphasis on Welsing’s theories or similar melanin-based ideologies. Still, not
only has there been a reluctance to criticize her, but it is clear that the the-
ory does exist as a form of substratum in the milieu. Welsing is treated as an
acknowledged academic in scholarly Afrocentric journals like Journal of Black
Studies and Journal of Black Psychology, so she cannot be dismissed as a fringe
author in the field. In 2005 she appeared in the Afrocentric documentary 500
Years Later, written by Molefi Kete Asante Jr, the son of Molefi Kete Asante,
together with other Afrocentric writers like Asante and Karenga.
   If Welsing in some ways tries to downplay the magical aspect of melanin, at
least in her more scholarly publications, other writers are more upfront with
their ideas. In the works of another melanin theorist, Carol Barnes, we find
that melanin makes a person almost divine.62 There is also a smaller publishing
industry that produces books on how to activate the power of melanin within
you. These books often include health tips and different spiritual techniques
like meditation by which this can be done. Particularly, there is an emphasis
on maintaining a correct diet in order to awaken the melanin power within


 59. The Sirius B controversy relates to the French anthropologist Marcel Griaule, whose
     descriptions of the beliefs of the Dogon people in the 1940s included interviews with
     Dogon elders who seemed to know that the star Sirius had a twin star next to it. As this
     knowledge would have been impossible without technology unavailable to the Dogon
     at the time, it created a debate as to how this was possible. Recent studies are critical of
     Griaule’s descriptions, and question the supposedly isolated nature of the Dogon people.
     The idea of the Dogon’s knowledge of Sirius B has contributed to theories on extraterres-
     trials and UFOs. Welsing’s knowledge of the Dogon probably derived from this literature.
     Temple, The Sirius Mystery; De Montellano, “Multicultural Pseudoscience”.
 60. Howe, Afrocentrism, 269.
 61. Collins, From Black Power to Hip Hop, 115–16.
 62. Barnes, Melanin.


                                                                                             67
fredrik gregorius



the person. Examples of such books are Deanne Meningall’s The Melanin
Diet (2009) and Llaila O. Afrika’s Nutricide: The Nutritional Destruction of the
Black Race (2001), which not only presents ways to improve health but also
describes junk food as part of a white conspiracy against the black race. Afrika
explains the relation between black and white people: