c­ arries within it an interesting distinction. The field of “occultism” consists not
 only of “disenchanted esotericists”, but also of those interested outsiders who
 seek to make sense of claims that have been connected to the field of the eso-
 teric, in disenchanted terms. This, in fact, gives a rationale for including all
 those academics and intellectuals, both the sympathetic and the sceptically
 minded, who sought to explain the phenomena of spiritualism with recourse
 to physical theories, or psychological models, as part of a broader discourse of
 “occultism”.
     What does it mean to make sense of the esoteric in disenchanted terms?
 Hanegraaff ’s analysis, which has focused on the reinterpretation of esoteric
 thought by self-professed esotericists, finds one crucial tendency to be that
 elements such as the supposition of a living nature, the mediation of higher
 knowledge, and the a-causal correspondences between things in the universe
 have been replaced by “disenchanted” alternatives where pseudo-mechanical
 and pseudo-materialistic interpretations have become the norm.46 Where the
 Renaissance magus understood ritual efficacy in terms of interaction with
 the anima mundi or the intercession of spiritual entities of various kinds, the
 modern “disenchanted” magician would instead refer to “energies” or “forces”
 working through subtle but essentially causal principles (often in explicit anal-
 ogy with electricity, magnetism and, increasingly in the twentieth century,
 quantum mechanics), or through “psychologized” understandings of mediat-
 ing entities.47 These tendencies belong to the first part of Hanegraaff ’s defini-
 tion of occultism, namely the “attempts by esotericists to come to terms with
 a disenchanted world”. If we go on to consider the second part, the attempts
 “by people in general to make sense of esotericism from the perspective of
 a disenchanted secular world”, we open the door to a much wider range of
 interpretational strategies. One major difference is that while the esotericists
 will generally tend to take for granted that phenomena connected with the
 esoteric are actually real, in some significant and irreducible sense, the “gen-
 eral public” is not necessarily constrained by any such ontological presupposi-
 tions. Thus we might find fully and truly disenchanted perspectives, which flat
 out deny the mysterious incalculable forces which esotericists, through “ter-
 minological scientism” and “rhetorics of rationality”, redefine in “disenchanted
 terms”. Instead, the claims about such forces may be accounted for in terms of
 well-known, ordinary phenomena that may, at the most sceptical end of the
 spectrum at least, include illusions, psychopathology, trickery or lies.48


 46. This difference is of course based on Antoine Faivre’s description of the “esoteric form of
     thought” as consisting of four intrinsic characteristics plus two non-intrinsic ones. Faivre,
     Access to Western Esotericism, 10–15. See especially Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the
     Disenchantment of the World”.
 47. Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of the World”, 361–9; cf. Asprem,
     “Magic Naturalized?”; Asprem, Arguing with Angels, chapter 4.
 48. For “terminological scientism”, see Hammer, Claiming Knowledge.


                                                                                             345
egil asprem



    The production of various disenchanted perspectives on esoteric discourse
 should be viewed in the context of a broader discourse on the naturalization
of the supernatural.49 An explicitly naturalistic stance grew popular during
 the professionalization of the natural sciences in the nineteenth century, and
 this development is indispensable to understanding some of the philosophi-
 cal thrust behind psychical research.50 Naturalism is, however, a flexible and
 broad concept, both philosophically and as a cultural–historical phenom-
 enon.51 In the closing decades of the nineteenth century, a debate over “sci-
 entific naturalism” and the place of the supernatural was at the heart of what
 was being perceived as a widening conflict between science and religion; this
 is well illustrated by the “agnosticism debate”, of which Thomas Henry Huxley
 was the main protagonist and provocateur.52
    The naturalization of the supernatural took a wide variety of forms.
 Although all are sceptical to traditional concepts of the “supernatural”, their
 alternatives may differ radically.53 On the sceptical wing, the psychiatrist
 Henry Maudsley’s Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings (1886) illus-
 trates a completely disenchanted perspective. Maudsley concluded that claims
 about the supernatural could be accounted for by humans’ inherent tenden-
 cies towards “malobservation and misinterpretation of nature”, sometimes
 coupled with genuine psychological disturbances including hallucinations
 and hysteria.54 Maudsley illustrates a point that was crucial to Huxley’s notion
 of agnosticism, namely that one should always start to look for explanations
 of seemingly inexplicable occurrences (and claims of such) among mecha-
 nisms that we do know something about. In Maudsley’s case, secure ground
was found in our established knowledge of the human mind, particularly its
weaknesses.
    Psychical researchers were also part of this naturalizing tendency, but
instead of reducing away the phenomena, they focused on finding room
for them within a naturalistic worldview. Much of the intellectual effort to
­redefine the supernatural in the context of the SPR was carried out by Frederic
 W. H. Myers (1843–1901). Myers composed a whole regime of neologisms to


 49. This term is borrowed from the title of an early first historical work on psychical research,
     written by a sceptical insider: Podmore, The Naturalisation of the Supernatural.
 50. See e.g. Frank Miller Turner, Between Science and Religion, 8–37; Frank Miller Turner,
     Contesting Cultural Authority, 131–50, 171–200; Lightman, The Origins of Agnosticism.
 51. For the cultural flexibility of naturalism in relation to “the supernatural” see e.g. Noakes,
     “Spiritualism, Science and the Supernatural in mid-Victorian Britain”; for reflections over
     the meaning of naturalism(s) as a position on science and metaphysics in modern phil­
     osophy, see e.g. De Caro & Macarthur, Naturalism in Question; Flanagan, “Varieties of
     Naturalism”.
 52. See e.g. Huxley et al., Christianity and Agnosticism; Ward, Naturalism and Agnosticism.
 53. This point is made clear with regard to spiritualism by Noakes, “Spiritualism, Science and
     the Supernatural in mid-Victorian Britain”.
 54. Maudsley, Natural Causes and Supernatural Seemings, 354.


346
                                          psychic enchantments of the educated classes



serve as technical terminology for the prospective discipline, most of which
are listed in the glossary accompanying his posthumously published Human
Personality (1903). Among the most enduring ones was the concept of “telep-
athy”, designed as a technical term to replace the word “thought transference”,
which was associated with folk beliefs and sideshow tricks.55
   Furthermore illustrating the naturalistic strategy of psychical research,
Myers introduced the word “supernormal” to replace the problematic “super-
natural”. While the supernatural implied a contrariety with nature and natural
law which was quite unacceptable for the scientifically minded, the supernor-
mal referred merely to a deviance from “normality”:

      The word supernatural is open to grave objections; it assumes that
      there is something outside nature, and it has become associated
      with arbitrary interference with law. Now there is no reason to
      suppose that the psychical phenomena with which we deal are less
      a part of nature, or less subject to fixed and definite law, than any
      other phenomena.56

This new scheme of definitions attempted to ground the many “supernormal”
phenomena within a naturalistic discourse, making them capable in principle
of being taken seriously by educated people and scientists. Telepathy, Myers’s
most successful neologism, was inscribed at the core of this project. After
its first appearance in the 1880s, it saw a number of naturalistic and quasi-­
disenchanted interpretations, from an effect of “brainwaves” in electromag-
netic fields (a theory first championed by the physicist Oliver Lodge, a pioneer
of radio technology), to the exertion of obscure “metetherial” powers of the
“subliminal self ” (Myers’s own later theory).57 In general we could divide the
naturalistic explanatory models of psychical research into three major types,
on a continuum from the less to the more “disenchanted”: some (notably
Alfred Russel Wallace, co-inventor of the Darwinian selection theory of evolu-
tion) leaned towards spiritualism and wanted to open up naturalism to such
a wide extent as to accommodate the actual, real existence of disembodied
spirits; others, often termed “animists” (McDougall was a strong proponent
of this position), did not believe in spirits, but instead attributed spiritualistic
phenomena to capricious powers of the human organism, often connected to
a theory of vitalistic, non-mechanistic biology; finally, a more disenchanted
option was to focus on a few core “effects”, such as telepathy, and look for mech-
anistic theories of them, usually in terms of electromagnetic fields or waves.58

 55. Myers, Human Personality, vol. 1, xiii–xxii.
 56. Ibid., xxii.
 57. For a discussion, see e.g. Asprem, “Parapsychology”, 640–43; cf. Luckhurst, The Invention of
     Telepathy.
 58. For a similar exploration of the varieties of naturalistic strategies to spiritualism, see
     Noakes, “Spiritualism, Science and the Supernatural in mid-Victorian Britain”.

                                                                                            347
egil asprem



FROM LABORATORY TO MAINSTREAM:
CONCLUSIONS ABOUT THE PARANORMAL IN OCCULTURE