1951), but also popularized the idea of it as a universal religious technique,
cross-cultural and ahistoric, and the “original” form of religiosity.73 However,
the term “shamanism” is problematic when used to refer to religious phenom-
ena beyond those relating to the Tungusic cultures the word originates in,
and becomes increasingly problematic when considering the extremely broad
application it has been put to. Already in the early 1960s the concept of sha-
manism had been expanded to include the Eskimos,74 Native Americans,75
Hungarians,76 and even biblical stories.77 Other locations include the Saami
culture,78 “Finno-Ugric cultures”,79 Ireland80 and, quite recently, Africa.81
    As is now widely recognized, Eliade’s phenomenological project was inti-
mately tied to his religionist concerns.82 In his youth – and continuing to his
death – Eliade was greatly influenced by René Guénon – author and founder
of the Traditionalist school of esoteric thought.83 The central concerns of
Traditionalism were the critique of Western modernity and the pursuit of
“authentic primordial tradition”. For example, the term “reintegration” that was
central to Eliade’s work, as well as his very conception of “tradition”, was most
likely to have been derived from Guénon,84 and his Cosmos and History – bet-
ter known in English by its original subtitle, The Myth of the Eternal Return –
can be compared with Guénon’s Crisis of the Modern World (1927) and fellow
Traditionalist Julius Evola’s Revolt Against the Modern World (1934).85 Eliade
was an active participant, from 1949 to 1976, in the Eranos meetings arranged
in Ascona, Switzerland, since 1933. There he congregated with figures such as
Carl Gustav Jung, Gershom Scholem, Henry Corbin, and Joseph Campbell86 –
all respected and influential scholars in their respective fields and, even more
importantly, influenced by similar esoteric–Traditionalist views, and in turn
highly influential on later esotericism.

 73. Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, 165–80. The idea of the antiquity of shamanism
     has been criticized by, among others, Sidky, “On the Antiquity of Shamanism and its Role
     in Human Religiosity”.
 74. Holtved, “Eskimo Shamanism”.
 75. Hultkrantz, “Spirit Lodge”.
 76. Fazekas, “Hungarian Shamanism, Material and History of Research”.
 77. Kapelrud, “Shamanic Features in the Old Testament”.
 78. E.g. Hultkrantz, “Aspects of Saami (Lapp) Shamanism”.
 79. Corradi-Musi, “Supernatural Heroes in Finno-Ugric Shamanism”.
 80. Karjala, “Aspects of the Other World in Irish Folk Tradition”.
 81. See Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, 188.
 82. On the “Jung–Eliade school of thought”, see Wasserstrom, Religion After Religion, 23.
 83. On Guénon and Traditionalism, see Sedgwick, Against the Modern World. On later
     Traditionalist influences, see Granholm, “The Rune-Gild”; and Chapter 12 in the present
     volume.
 84. Wasserstrom, Religion After Religion, 38, 40.
 85. Ibid., 46. On the influence of Traditionalism on Eliade, see Sedgwick, Against the Modern
     World, 109–16.
 86. On Eranos, particularly with reference to Eliade, Corbin and Scholem, see Wasserstrom,
     Religion After Religion.


42
                                                                  constructing esotericisms



   It should also be noted that the father of the modern school of the study of
Western esotericism, Antoine Faivre, also participated in the Eranos meetings
in the 1970s, and had particularly close relations to Henry Corbin. Together
with Corbin, Faivre was even the co-founder, in 1974, of a fiercely religionist
French offshoot of the Eranos meetings, called the Université Saint Jean de
Jérusalem. Conceived of as a “counter-university”, an “international center for
comparative spiritual research” dedicated to reviving esoteric knowledge and
fighting the evils of the modern world, the group counted a great number of
early specialists of esoteric subjects among its members – including Eliade
himself. As carefully documented by Hanegraaff, this platform was some-
thing of a laboratory for Faivre’s ideas about esotericism in his most religionist
period, which would last until approximately the end of the 1980s.87
   Returning to shamanism, what we perceive here is a complex tangled
web of inventions of tradition. Scholarly inquiry was linked to the quest for
national identity and tradition, and the creation of shamanism as a “univer-
sal and archaic technique” indeed revolves around the creation of perennial
tradition – at the same time influencing, and being influenced by, esoteric
discourse. Furthermore, the case of Eliade makes it clear that essentially per-
ennialist notions of tradition, similar to the idea of philosophia perennis dis-
cussed earlier, have asserted a strong influence on scholarly constructs such
as shamanism, which in the next instance have informed actual ­practices and
emic notions of tradition and connection with an archaic authentic past. We
shall now continue to discuss aspects of this latter step in more detail.


SCHOLARS READ: ESOTERICISM BECOMES AN OBJECT

Scholars and scholarship do not exist in isolation; rather, they co-inhabit their
world with their research subjects and readers. When it comes to studies of
(particularly modern) esotericism, the researched and the reader are often
the same person. This has major implications for scholarship in the field.
Most current major scholars of esotericism stress the scholarly constructed
nature of their research field,88 asserting that “‘[e]sotericism’ does not exist
as an object”.89 However, with esoteric actors becoming increasingly familiar
with scholarship from the field of Western esotericism, esotericism is indeed
becoming an object. It is actively created as such by esotericists who are influ-
enced and informed by the scholarship they actively and eagerly consume. We


 87. For the full detailed discussion of the development of Faivre’s career, and the various cul-
     tural and social influences on his work, see Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy,
     chapter 4.
 88. See e.g. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 402; Hanegraaff, “The Study of
     Western Esotericism”, 489–91; Hammer, “Esotericism in New Religious Movements”, 445.
 89. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 9.


                                                                                             43
egil asprem and kennet granholm



will provide a brief example of this process. In the Sweden-originated magic
order Dragon Rouge, founder and head ideologist Thomas Karlsson – who
is also a scholar of Western esotericism, having earned a doctorate in 2010
at Stockholm University for a thesis on the seventeenth-century rune mys-
tic Johannes Bureus90 – has presented an analysis of his order grounded in
Antoine Faivre’s conceptualization of esotericism.91 This text, directed to prac-
tising magicians rather than to an academic audience, implies that92 esoteric
actors may easily draw on scholarship in order to align themselves to “the
primordial/perennial tradition” as described by scholars – to more properly
represent esotericism as “authorized” by scholarly authorities, who are much
respected by many in the esoteric milieu. This invention of “esoteric tradition”
is in many ways similar to the invention of “shamanistic tradition”, discussed
above, in the pivotal role played by academic authors. It is different, however,
in that tradition is here created in lieu of scholarly insistence that no such tra-
dition exists, rather than with active scholarly participation in the process of
construction. In a sense, the notion of a “tradition” thus emerging is the result
of a “fetishistic” reading of scholarship on esotericism.
    An implication of these factors is that, when studying the esoteric in the
contemporary world, we might need to expand our view to include not only
“esotericists” – or only esoteric discourse, to use Kocku von Stuckrad’s term
– but rather the broader field of “discourse on the esoteric” (i.e. all actors
who engage with the esoteric in one way or another). Thus actors “relegating”
phenomena to the field of the esoteric and occult (including scholars such as
Truzzi as well as non-scholarly detractors), proponents of esoteric worldviews
and philosophies, as well as more neutral scholars, are all participants on this
field of discourse. This approach is foreshadowed by Wouter Hanegraaff ’s
more recent work, where he approaches the issue of how certain phenom-
ena have been produced as “rejected knowledge” in polemical and othering
discourses, and through scholarship with various types of hidden (and not so
hidden) agendas.93 However, instead of only looking at opponents and pro-
ponents, more neutral scholarly commentators should be included as well, as
should the material dimensions of contemporary scholarship. The creation
of specialist journals (e.g. Esoterica; Aries: Journal for the Study of Western
Esotericism), specialist book series (e.g. SUNY’s Western Esoteric Traditions),
and even scholarly organizations (Association for the Study of Esotericism;
ESSWE) and study programmes (the University of Amsterdam programme in
“Mysticism and Western Esotericism”, and Exeter University’s Centre for the


 90. Karlsson, Götisk Kabbala och Runisk Alkemi.
 91. Karlsson, “Esoterism and the Left-Hand Path”.
 92. For reflections on the constructivist ontology inherent in this claim, see e.g. the many
     thought-provoking essays and reviews in Hacking, Historical Ontology.
 93. Hanegraaff, “Forbidden Knowledge”; Hanegraaff, “The Trouble with Images”; Hanegraaff,
     Esotericism and the Academy.


44
                                                                 constructing esotericisms



Study of Esotericism), all using the term esotericism to signify “something”
that they are “about”, significantly contributes to the reification of the category
for the general audience – despite the explicated contrary intentions of most
scholars in the field.


FICTION, POPULAR CULTURE AND THE INVENTION OF TRADITION