In his famous 1999 recantation of the strong secularization thesis, Peter Berger
noted that there were really only two exceptions to what he called an ongoing
and increasing desecularization of the world: European societies west of the
old Iron Curtain, and “an international subculture composed of people with
Western-type higher education”.2 Parallel to the inversion of secularization
theory, scholars of new religious movements started reversing Max Weber’s
thesis of the disenchantment of the world as well (Entzauberung der Welt),
arguing that a process of re-enchantment is sweeping through Western cul-
ture.3 In 1918 Weber had proclaimed that all “mysterious incalculable forces”

   1. Sam Harris, The End of Faith, 43.
   2. Berger, “The Desecularization of the World”, 10. For closer discussions of secularization and
      its related terms and theories, see Chapters 11 and 15 of this volume.
   3. Weber, “Science as a Vocation”, 155. The term “re-enchantment” appears to have entered
      academic discourse primarily through some early classics of postmodern criticisms of
      modern science in the 1980s, particularly Berman, The Reenchantment of the World, and


330
                                          psychic enchantments of the educated classes



were being eradicated from the world by science and scientifically based tech-
nologies. Entzauberung – literally the disappearance of magic (Zauber)4 – sig-
nified a new mentality in which modern people believed that anything around
them could, in principle, be comprehended rationally, and that no offerings to
capricious deities or magical manipulations of occult forces were needed to
master the world.
   “Magic”, however, failed to disappear. Whether we are talking about self-
designated modern magicians coming out of the various currents of occult-
ism and neopaganism, or about that vague and poorly defined set of “occult”
and “supernatural” beliefs and practices that somehow will not fit neat catego-
ries such as “religion” or “science”, “magic”, in fact, seems to thrive at the heart
of high modernity.5 Some have even connected the resilience of the “mys-
terious incalculable forces” to the secularization process itself; according to
Christopher Partridge, for example,

       the deteriorating/secularized Christian culture is being replaced by
       a cultic milieu, which is not shaped like sectarian, denominational
       or ecclesiastical religion. Nor is it principally determined by that
       “international subculture” identified by Berger, which is “composed
       of people with a Western-type higher education”. Increasingly, “offi-
       cial” definitions of reality are being challenged by a new ­subculture


      David Ray Griffin, The Reenchantment of Science. From there it appears to have spread into
      the many fields of postmodern scholarship-cum-advocacy of the 1990s, including ecofemi-
      nism and deep ecology. For the more analytical use of re-enchantment in scholarship on
      modern and contemporary religion, see e.g. Heelas, The New Age Movement; Woodhead &
      Heelas, Religion in Modern Times; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West.
   4. A caveat should be expressed at this point, as, in actuality, a distinction was beginning to
      be made between Magie and Zauber in German Religionswissenchaft in the early 1900s;
      “magic” would thus refer specifically to “occult” arts and techniques of controlling capri-
      cious forces – which made it more “scientific” and also more friendly to “community build-
      ing”, as an entry on “Magier, Magie” in the widely cited Realencyklopädie für Protestantische
      Theologie und Kirche stated it in 1900. Taken as a whole, Weber’s late work (to which the
      thesis of Entzauberung truly belongs) displays some ambiguity when it comes to the actual
      relation between Magie and Zauber (“magic” and “enchantment”), but overall it seems
      clear that the process of transformation which he referred to as the “disenchantment of the
      world” did indeed include the disappearance of magical means of controlling the world and
      achieving salvation. For a discussion, see Breuer, “Magie, Zauber, Entzauberung”, especially
      119–20.
   5. For the survival of various types of self-designated “Hermetic” ritual magic, draw-
      ing on pre- or early modern esoteric sources, see Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the
      Disenchantment of the World”; cf. Asprem, “Magic Naturalized?”; Asprem, Arguing with
      Angels, especially chapter 4. As has been made increasingly clear over the last decades,
      “magic” as an etic category in anthropology and the history of religion is deeply problem-
      atic, and based on little substance except an inheritance from centuries of identity poli-
      tics and religious polemics. See e.g. Styers, Making Magic; Pasi, “Magic”; Hanegraaff,
      Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 3.


                                                                                              331
egil asprem



       of dissent and opposition. In a sense, we are witnessing a return to a
       form of magical culture – what I will call “occulture”.6

The observation that secularization was giving way to new forms of re-
enchanted, magical culture was already made in the early 1970s, during what
was perceived as a sudden and intense “occult revival”.7 As Partridge makes
very clear in Chapter 6 of the present volume, his concept of occulture is much
indebted to the “cultic milieu” model originally proposed by Colin Campbell,
but with certain significant differences.8 One of them is the question of oppo-
sition and deviance: whereas the cultic milieu was largely defined in terms of
its opposition to “orthodox” science and religion, “occulture is ordinary”. Even
though particular groups, individuals, ideologies and belief systems may be
described in terms of deviance from the mainstream, the broader occultural
environment, as such, is becoming so ordinary as to engulf the mainstream.
This is particularly emphasized by the place of popular culture in occultural
production and dissemination; that is, the formation of a popular occulture
manifesting itself in widely distributed products of literature, film and music.9
    The inclusive definition of occultural re-enchantment notwithstanding, an
oppositional trait still seems to be lingering when it comes to the question of
the academy and higher education. Berger’s observation that an international
subculture of people with Western-style academic educations, a gobalized
intellectual elite with largely secularist worldviews, is an exception to desec-
ularization, is still implicated by current re-enchantment models. Occulture
spreads largely through popular culture, and its ordinariness manifests prima-
rily by reshaping the religious vernacular. Furthermore, we read that the return
of this “form of magical culture” means that “‘official’ definitions of reality are
being challenged”; the assumedly hegemonic, disenchanted worldview of the
highly educated classes is being challenged by re-enchanted alternatives.10
    According to Weber, the modern research university, as it arose during
the nineteenth century, had been a driving force of the disenchantment of
the world, especially through its extended influence on the engineers reshap-
ing society’s technological infrastructure and the government technocrats
rationalizing and engineering its social structure. While new approaches to
this domain of social theory emphasize instead the sacralization of technology

   6. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 40.
   7. An early reference in the sociological literature to this “occult revival” in the context of the
      youth culture born in the late 1960s, see Truzzi, “The Occult Revival as Popular Culture”.
      For a more systematic discussion of these social phenomena in terms of secularization and
      typologies of religious organization, see Colin Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and
      Secularization”; Colin Campbell, “The Secret Religion of the Educated Classes”.
   8. Cf. Colin Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and Secularization”; Kaplan & Lööw, The
      Cultic Milieu.
   9. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 119–84.
 10. Ibid., 40.


332
                                         psychic enchantments of the educated classes



and the transformation of the patterns of religion and enchantment in society
at large, we also notice that they have kept the black box closed when it comes
to disenchantment’s engine; at the heart of the machine, the wiring, the ris-
ing pistons, and spinning cogwheels are assumed to operate pretty much as
before. The present chapter takes a peek into the box, to see if there may be
ghosts hiding in the machine after all. Could it be that Berger’s international
subculture of the academically educated is itself touched by the occulture, or
even to some extent implicated in its production?
    Considered as a sociological term, occulture

      refers to the environment within which, and the social processes by
      which particular meanings relating, typically, to spiritual, esoteric,
      paranormal and conspiratorial ideas emerge, are disseminated, and
      become influential in societies and in the lives of individuals.11