16.   Parsons, The Book of BABALON, 2 March 1946.
17.   Parsons, letter to Crowley, 6 March 1946, in Symonds, King of the Shadow Realm, 564.
18.   Crowley, letter of 19 April 1946, in Sutin, Do What Thou Wilt, 414.
19.   Crowley, letter of 22 May 1946, in Sutin, Do What Thou Wilt, 414–15.
20.   Mitchell, “Scientology”. See Symonds, King of the Shadow Realm, 564.


                                                                                             185
hugh b . urban



in December 1969, asserting that these rites did indeed take place but that
Hubbard was sent in on a special military mission to “handle the situation”.
This he successfully did, the Church claimed, rescuing the girl (Betty) and
shutting down the occult operation:

      Hubbard broke up black magic in America … [H]e was sent in to
      handle the situation. He went to live at the house and investigated
      the black magic rites and the general situation and found them
      very bad … Hubbard’s mission was successful far beyond anyone’s
      expectations … Hubbard rescued a girl they were using. The black
      magic group was dispersed and destroyed.21

It is worth noting, however, that neither the Church of Scientology nor any
independent researcher has ever produced any evidence for this claim.
    Not surprisingly, there has been tremendous debate over Hubbard’s involve-
ment with Parsons and the influence of Crowley on later Scientology. While
Hubbard only refers to Crowley by name in one series of lectures from 1952
– calling him “my very good friend” – there has been much speculation as to
whether any occult or magical ideas carried over into the early Scientology
movement.22 On one side, critics of the Church (such as Hubbard’s own son,
L. Ron Jr) have suggested that Hubbard was “deeply involved in the occult” and
that he even saw himself as the modern successor to the Great Beast.23 Other
ex-members and critics of the Church such as Jon Atack have alleged that
Crowley’s magic lies at the inner core of Scientology.24 On the other side, the
Church of Scientology itself has adamantly denied any connection between
Crowley’s magic and Hubbard’s religious ideas; indeed, it forced the Sunday
Times to pay a settlement for suggesting that there might be such a connec-
tion.25 Meanwhile, many scholars such as Roy Wallis and J. Gordon Melton
have largely dismissed Hubbard’s connection to Crowley, arguing that “there is
no evidence that Hubbard’s system of Scientology owes any great debt to that
of Crowley”.26
    Here I will not attempt to resolve this complex debate, which has been
argued fiercely by scholars, Scientologists and ex-Scientologists alike (and
elsewhere I have outlined the possible links between Crowley’s magic and
early Scientology27). Instead, I would suggest that Hubbard’s early ­involvement

 21. Church of Scientology, “Letter”.
 22. Hubbard, Philadelphia Doctorate Course, 185–8. See Urban, “The Occult Roots of
     Scientology?”.
 23. Hubbard, Jr, “Penthouse Interview”, 113.
 24. Atack, A Piece of Blue Sky, 9–93.
 25. Wallis, The Road to Total Freedom, 111–12.
 26. Ibid., 111; Melton, The Church of Scientology, 8.
 27. Urban, “The Occult Roots of Scientology?” Direct and indirect links include the follow-
     ing: (i) Hubbard himself in the Philadelphia Doctorate Course compares the practice of


186
                                                                  the secrets of scientology



in occultism and the Church’s attempts to deny the connection reflect a much
deeper concern with secrecy, information control and concealment that sur-
rounds Hubbard’s entire biography. Indeed, Hubbard would spend much of
his life dodging investigations by various government agencies, and finally
spent the last years of his life in hiding in the California desert. Regardless of
the exact nature of his involvement in occultism, the theme of occultation is
one that runs throughout his entire life and hagiographic mythology.


A COLD WAR RELIGION: SECRECY, SURVEILLANCE AND SECURITY

The period during which the Church of Scientology was founded and experi-
enced its most rapid growth – from the early 1950s to the late 1980s – almost
exactly corresponded to the decades of the Cold War. Just four years after
parting company with Parsons, Hubbard published his bestselling new science
of human mind called “Dianetics” – first in a science fiction magazine called
Astounding Science Fiction in May 1950, and then in book form later that same
year.28 His new science of the mind was soon followed by the birth of a new
self-described religion called the Church of Scientology, first incorporated in
1953. From its origins until the death of its founder in 1986, Scientology was
very much a Cold War religion, deeply influenced by and preoccupied with
the central anxieties of these decades – and perhaps above all by the Cold War
obsession with secrecy, surveillance and information control.
   From the very outset, Hubbard himself presented Scientology as a kind of
Cold War religion and as the ultimate solution to the threat of nuclear war.
Now that human beings possessed the technology of weapons that can destroy
the entire planet, we needed a new technology that can control man:

      With man now equipped with weapons sufficient to destroy all
      mankind on earth, the emergence of a new science capable of
      hand­ling man is vital. Scientology is such a science. It was born in
      the same crucible as the atomic bomb.29


     Scientology with Crowley’s magic (185–8), and the eight-pointed Scientology cross bears a
     very close resemblance to the Rose-Cross lamen that adorns the cards in Crowley’s famous
     Thoth tarot deck; (ii) Hubbard’s key symbol for the Thetan or spiritual self (Θ) is identical
     to the central symbol of Crowley’s Sigil of Babalon; (iii) Hubbard’s early Scientology lec-
     tures focus heavily on the idea of “exteriorizing” the Thetan from the body, which bears a
     close resemblance to the exteriorization of the astral body or body of light, a key theme in
     Crowley’s Magick in Theory and Practice; and (iv) Hubbard’s early lectures assert that the
     liberated Thetan has full self-determinism and can essentially do anything it chooses, a goal
     reminiscent of Crowley’s ideal of the fully realized magus and his dictum of “do what thou
     wilt”.
 28. Hubbard, “Dianetics”; Hubbard, Dianetics.
 29. Hubbard, Scientology, 163.


                                                                                             187
hugh b . urban



At the same time, however, Hubbard was also quite preoccupied – if not
obsessed – with Communism, writing numerous letters to J. Edgar Hoover
and the FBI. Not only did he identify various individuals (including his own
ex-wife) as Communist sympathizers, but he also offered his techniques as a
means to combat the Soviet menace.30
   But perhaps nowhere was Hubbard’s Church more a “Cold War religion”
than in its intense focus on secrecy, surveillance and information control.
As Angus MacKenzie notes in his study of secrecy in the post-World War II
decades:

        The US government has always danced with the devil of secrecy
        during wartime … the cold war provided the foreign threat to jus-
        tify the pervasive Washington belief that secrecy should have the
        greatest possible latitude and openness should be restricted as
        much as possible – constitutional liberties be damned.31

Hubbard’s early Dianetics movement had focused on the goal of achieving the
state of “Clear” – a kind of optimal mental and physical wellbeing; yet, by the
late 1960s, Hubbard added a series of increasingly esoteric levels beyond the
Clear state called Operating Thetan (OT), in which one gains deeper knowl-
edge about one’s true spiritual nature (Thetan) and the history of the universe.
As Wallis notes, “[t]he belief system of the movement became increasingly
esoteric, and a ‘hierarchy of sanctification’ emerged. Members could locate
themselves on levels of initiation into the movement’s mysteries”.32 While
the grades leading up to the Clear state are fairly “exoteric”, the higher lev-
els beyond Clear are quite secret and of highly restricted access. Harriet
Whitehead explains in her study of the Church,

        After the Grades … matters become more complicated because the
        pre-clear proceeds to the Confidential levels of auditing … Hubbard
        decided to cordon off all processes and techniques beyond Grade
        IV so that the uninitiated would have no prior knowledge … of the
        special theories explaining the significance of each level.33

More than one observer has thus compared Scientology to a modern ver-
sion of a “mystery religion”, not unlike the Greek mysteries or various other
secret societies and esoteric orders (including modern esoteric orders, such
as Parsons’s and Crowley’s OTO).34 Although the Church’s official map of the


 30.   See Urban, “Fair Game”.
 31.   MacKenzie, Secrets, 201; see also Curry, Freedom at Risk, 8.
 32.   Wallis, The Road to Total Freedom, 125.
 33.   Whitehead, Renunciation and Reformulation, 130.
 34.   Barrett, Sects, “Cults” and Alternative Religions, 255.


188
                                                                the secrets of scientology