By the Eighteenth Century, and the rise of Science, the idea of
      “Animal Magnetism” arose in the West, being the first manifesta-
      tion of the “Energy” Model of magick. This model places emphasis
      on the presence of “subtle energies” which can be manipulated via
      a number of techniques. Along came Bulwer Lytton and his idea of
      “Vril” energy, Eliphas Levi and the Astral Light, Mediums & ecto-
      plasm, Westernised “popular” accounts of Prana, Chakras, and
      Kundalini, and eventually, Wilhelm Reich’s Orgone energy.53

This model shows the perceived shift from a view of magic that was “super-
natural” to a model where explanation was sought and offered based on the
existence of invisible forces. Hine continues by describing the psychologiza-
tion of magic:

      The next development came with the popularisation of Psychology,
      mainly due to the Psychoanalytic fads of Freud, Jung & co. During
      this phase, the Otherworlds became the Inner­worlds, demons
      were rehoused into the Unconscious Mind, and Hidden Masters
      revealed as manifestations of the “Higher Self ”.54

This model is strongly associated with early twentieth-century occultism, par-
ticularly Crowley and Spare. The systematic manner in which Hine ­historicizes
magical models serves not only as an implicit appeal to tradition but also dis-
plays the appeal to academia and science mentioned earlier. These models,
though historicized, are not abrogated. The Chaos Magician is free to choose
from any one of them or a combination of them all. Hine goes on to describe
the latest model of magic:

      The current up-and-coming paradigm is the “Cybernetic” model,
      as we swing into being an information-based culture. This model


52. Hine, Oven-Ready Chaos, 19–20.
53. Ibid., 20.
54. Ibid., 20–21.



106
                                                            perennialism and iconoclasm



      says that the Universe, despite appearences [sic], is stochastic in
      nature. Magick is a set of techniques for rousing a neurological
      storm in the brain which brings about microscopic fluctuations in
      the Universe, which lead eventually to macroscopic changes – in
      accordance with the magician’s intent.55

This model differs from the previous one by placing the emphasis on neurol-
ogy rather than psychology. A reinterpretation of the macrocosm/microcosm
dynamic, this distinction serves to emphasize the connection between bio­
logical activity in the brain and the universe. The significant increase in abil-
ity to access and share information about occultism, esotericism, and new
religions at this time informs this model of magic. This ability was further
increased as Internet communities developed and expanded. However, despite
the insistence on the importance of information, the reliance of most instruc-
tional manuals on techniques such as sigilization56 suggests that a strong psy-
chological element remained prominent in Chaos Magick.
   There is one final point to note about Hine’s description of magical models
and it demonstrates a real awareness of how appeals for legitimacy function:

      It is also worth noting that should you ever find yourself in the posi-
      tion of having to “explain” all this weird stuff to an non-afficiando
      [sic] or skeptic, then the Psychological model is probably your best
      bet. These days, people who ascribe to the Spirit model, if they are
      not of a Pagan or Occult persuasion themselves, tend to think that
      they have an exclusive copyright over the use of Spirits! If the per-
      son is a computer buff or Fractal phreak, then by all means go for
      the “cyberpunk” paradigm. Scientists only tend to accept some-
      thing if a scientific “rationale” can be wheeled up to slot it into.57

Hine advises that one’s explanation of magic should be altered according to
the type of person to whom the explanation is being made. Awareness of how
and when to use different appeals for legitimacy is an important feature of
Chaos Magick, and twentieth-century occultism as a whole, and is a result of
the significant increase in access to information occurring in the 1970s and
1980s.




 55. Hine, Oven-Ready Chaos, 21. By “stochastic” he means non-deterministic: a system in
     which its current state does not determine its next state.
 56. This technique is most often attributed to Austin Osman Spare by Chaos Magicians. Spare’s
     ideas of magic were wholly psychologized.
 57. Hine, Oven-Ready Chaos, 21.



                                                                                         107
colin duggan



Wilde

In the Grimoire of Chaos Magick, published in 1986, Julian Wilde seeks to
legitimize his innovations of the established Chaos Magick of the authors
mentioned above. By this time, there are already ongoing debates about theory
and practice within the community of Chaos Magicians and Wilde will serve
as just one example. He engages in an appeal to tradition of the first type only
by emphasizing the place of the shaman as the original magician. He asserts
shamanism as ancient and primitive, a precursor to organized religion:

        The collection/accumulation of techniques and beliefs known as
        shamanism pre-dates all organised religion. The witch-doctor, the
        medicine man, the primitive sorcerer of the hunt, all have much in
        common and would have little difficulty in relating to each others
        [sic] practices – and yet shamanism remains an intensely personal
        and relevant system of application – each “wise man” (or woman),
        through a result of his own cultural heritage, retains and enjoys a
        fresh inter-relationship with those spirits, ancestors, animal-allies
        and supernatural beings that probe [sic] beneficial to him and his
        work – all progress is made through a fresh personal application of
        the inherited world-view. It is interesting (and perhaps reassuring
        to some of you/us) to note that from Eskimo to aborigine, in many
        cases the shaman is a misfit, sickly, reclusive and temperamental.58

Here, the shaman is constructed as a universal figure who shares core fea-
tures transculturally. However, in this case there is an inherent ability to renew
the relationship between the shamans and the culturally specific entities with
which they traffic. This characterization of the shaman as a natural innova-
tor creates the space for Wilde to legitimize his own innovations. He empha-
sizes the personal aspect of his constructed shaman and this also lends itself
to the legitimization of personal innovation while simultaneously placing the
shaman within the individualized framework of twentieth-century occultism.
As stated, Wilde uses the first strategy of legitimacy only and does not seek
to place himself as the next instance in a natural progression of “the magical
tradition”. He engages in iconoclasm with respect to early twentieth-century
occultism and states very clearly those with whom he does not agree:

        I grow wary/weary and increasingly intolerant of those organisa-
        tions/movements (the IOT and a few other notables excepted)
        that seek to codify and delineate every tiresome aspect of an
        increasingly over-blown and irrelevant world-view. Theosophic/


 58. Wilde, The Grimoire of Chaos Magick, 14.


108
                                                     perennialism and iconoclasm



      Kabalistic/Monotheistic lore is/should be dead, further, is evil, is
      rigid, is sexist, is status-ridden, is of a past we should have out-
      grown/disowned. It is time for new god/esse/s/daemons – learn to
      call them – they will always answer.59

The reference here to the “Theosophic/Kabalistic/Monotheistic” includes
much of the institutionalized occultism of the early twentieth century and
organized religions such as Christianity, Judaism and Islam, if “Monotheistic”
is taken as a catch-all term. This acknowledging and turning away from the
most recent predecessor in the perennialized tradition of magic is reiterated
with direct reference to the most recognizable and important magical order of
the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries:

      I find it inconceivable that so many talented occultists still cling to
      a perverted, post-victorian [sic] perspective of reality. The Golden
      Dawn and other movements of that ilk bestowed upon the world
      great pioneers/warriors (and I here acknowledge my debt and
      gratitude to them) but one can no longer trudge drearily in their
      well-worn footsteps, hoping that (by some process of sympathetic
      magic?) some of their accomplishments/abilities will rub off – if
      you pursue dinosaur tracks all you are likely to acquire are dino-
      saur droppings and a few bones – small reward for a life-time’s
      work. A fossil is not a living creature – ­discovering someone else’s
      reality and making it your own may be convenient and gratificatory
      [sic], but it is also second-rate.60

Wilde employs the first strategy but not the second. He seeks to affiliate with
an age-old and authentic tradition of magic originating with the shaman while
rejecting the systematization and organization of the Hermetic Order of the
Golden Dawn and the Theosophical Society. In this way he is trying to legiti-
mize his own innovations on Chaos Magick and delegitimize the parts of
Chaos Magick from which he distances himself. These appeals are made to the
community of Chaos Magicians and are part of the debate on the theory and
practice of Chaos Magick. One of the main reasons for Wilde’s rejection of the
most recent predecessors can be seen from this section of his text:

      My greetings to you, fellow-seekers/warriors of the/your new
      aeon! … those who have recognised/wished to actualise more per-
      tinence in the writings of Moorcock, Brady, Tolkien and Castenada
      [sic] than in Regardie, Fortune or even Crowley, those who have


59. Ibid., 12.
60. Ibid., 26.


                                                                                109
colin duggan