Notions of tradition have been central to many of the historical currents,
movements, and discourses that are now studied in the field of Western eso-
tericism. Historically, this is only to be expected: the cultural configurations
or discursive formations which are commonly seen as being at the base of
“esotericism” in the historical sense were formed in Renaissance intellectual
cultures which typically went far to equate the antiquity of a doctrine with
its truth. Functioning as special cases of arguments to authority, claims to
“tradition” were thus a central feature of the “episteme” in which the classic
esoteric discourses were formed.32 In fact, narratives of ancient wisdom are
omnipresent in esoteric discourse, whether related to Hermes Trismegistus,
Zoroaster, Moses or Orpheus, or to the increasingly more exotic ancients of
modern times, such as the Atlanteans, discarnate Secret Chiefs, or even space
aliens from the Pleiades. As a basic scheme, such genealogies of truth even
seem to have become the core foundational narrative of esotericism from the
Renaissance to the present day.33
   However, a variety of conceptions of the relation between tradition and
truth existed in the Renaissance.34 We might distinguish two concepts that are
of particular importance for the history of esotericism: prisca theologia, and
philosophia perennis. Although frequently used interchangeably, these in fact
denote two quite different epistemic schemes, evaluating the relation between
truth, history and tradition in quite different ways.35 Prisca theologia refers to
the notion of a “pristine theology”, revealed in a distant utopian past, and since
partly lost through history. This scheme, which is associated foremost with
the provocative pagan philosopher Gemistos Plethon (c. 1355–1452) and later
with the humanist programme of Marsilio Ficino (1433–99), fits basic ­biblical

 32. Cf. Foucault, The Order of Things.
 33. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 1.
 34. The following discussion of “ancient wisdom narratives” and their ultimate function in
     creating notions of “esotericism” is heavily indebted to Wouter Hanegraaff ’s recent study,
     Esotericism and the Academy, particularly the first two chapters. As the book is at the time
     of writing not yet typeset, references are unfortunately only precise to the level of chapters.
 35. This operative distinction seems to have been first noted in 1970 by Carl Schmitt, “Prisca
     Theologia e Philosophia Perennis”. Cf. the detailed discussion in Hanegraaff, Esotericism
     and the Academy, chapter 1.


                                                                                                33
egil asprem and kennet granholm



narratives of the Fall and the corrupting quality of temporality. As became
clear in the aftermath of the Reformation and among Catholic humanist
reformers, this notion of a more authentic and authoritative past had a radi-
cal or even revolutionary aspect to it: it meant that the discovery and diligent
study of ancient source texts had the potential of “restoring” truth and over-
throwing modern and hence “illegitimate” innovations. This was the radical
foundation of Ficino’s translations of the Platonic and Hermetic corpora, and
the currents of thought which it inspired.
    The notion of philosophia perennis was launched by the Augustinian scholar
Agostino Steuco (1497–1548) in 1540, and constitutes, when taken in a strict
analytic sense, a competing type of ancient wisdom narrative.36 Whereas the
connection between tradition and truth inherent in prisca theologia implied
a notion of decline and corruption (nostalgia concerning the loss of truth
as ages pass from a distant “Golden Age” of wisdom), philosophia perennis
presents a scheme where wisdom is eternal, always present underneath the
surface of any historical period. Where prisca theologia is radical, philosophia
perennis has a conservative tinge: contemporary traditions are authentic and
ought to be preserved, since they represent a hidden but living truth. Reform
is futile. In this perennialist form, the argumentum ad antiquitatem can even
be traced back to the early Christian church fathers, and their apologetic
attempts to create legitimacy for the young religion of Christianity. Since the
underlying assumption in late Hellenistic culture was that nothing could be
“both new and true”,37 church fathers like Augustine had to claim the ­antiquity
of Christianity, even when its founders had lived only a few generations earlier
and its status was that of a “new religious movement”. Thus, Augustine wrote
that what

      is now called the Christian religion, was with the ancients … and
      it was with the human race from its beginning to the time when
      Christ appeared in the flesh: from when on the true religion, which
      already existed, began to be called the Christian.38

As Wouter Hanegraaff has pointed out, the revival of philosophia perennis as
an explicit stance by Steuco in the sixteenth century must similarly be seen as a
response to the calls for reform based in part on prisca theologia.39 It was a way
to grant the antiquity of truth, while denying the need for reform, and a legiti-
mate basis for it could readily be found in the apologists of the early church.


 36. It has later been reinvented by Gottfried Leibniz (1646–1716), and popularized in the
     twentieth century by Aldous Huxley. The relevant locus classicus of the concept, however,
     is Steuco’s De Perenni Philosophia (1540).
 37. Droge, Homer or Moses?, 9.
 38. Augustine, quoted in Wind, Pagan Mysteries in the Renaissance, 21.
 39. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 1.


34
                                                                   constructing esotericisms



   In his erudite recent study, Hanegraaff shows how the different notions of
tradition implied in the ancient wisdom narratives of the Renaissance have been
entirely integral to the formation and construction of “esotericism”.40 While
the Renaissance intellectuals who created the “corpus of reference” for later
esoteric thought (e.g. Ficino, Pico, Reuchlin, Agrippa and others) constructed
their wisdom narratives to include ancient sages such as Hermes, Zoroaster,
Moses, Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato, they ­simultaneously played a danger-
ous argument into the hands of a new generation of reformers who wanted
to “purify” Christianity of any form of “paganism”.41 An “anti-­apologetic” dis-
course was born in the wake of the Reformation, with the explicit aim of com-
bating the dangerous “hostages” that the early church had taken and kept for
so long: pagan philosophy, superstition and magic. While strategies of prisca
theologia and philosophia perennis had worked to legitimate the truth of doc-
trine with reference to antiquity or eternal truth, they now became the source
for a suspicion that paganism had infiltrated Christianity. In the hands of these
later Protestant reformers, the Renaissance “history of truth” was inverted to
form a “history of error”.42 In their view, Zoroaster was the source of devil wor-
ship, and Plato a dangerous pagan whose ideas had infested Christian culture
and especially the Roman Church. Through the application of polemical sim-
plifications of history, all the diverse thinkers that were considered suspect
of paganism, magic, or worse were lumped together and seen as represent-
ing a connected diabolical trend. With the advent of the Enlightenment, this
inverted wisdom narrative was adopted by Enlightenment historians as well,
now adding the many acts of treachery against reason they saw to the existing
catalogue of errors. These were the first steps towards the reification of what
has later become known as “esotericism”. Importantly, it took shape as a cat-
egory of “rejected knowledge”, created in polemical battles to define correct
religion, philosophy and, increasingly, science.
   Despite the rejection, appeals to traditions of the sort discussed above con-
tinued throughout the early modern period and into late modernity. With
the publication of the Rosicrucian manifestos in the early seventeenth cen-
tury, and particularly with the creation of Rosicrucian orders about a century
later and the development of esoteric Freemasonry, the notion that a higher
knowledge from a mystic East and/or distant past has been handed down


 40. Note, however, that in addition to philosophia perennis and prisca theologia, Hanegraaff
     identifies a third strand of pia philosophia; this notion is separate from the two others in
     that it presupposes an element of progress or evolution in truth, as, for example, in the con-
     tinuation of prophecy and extended revelation.
 41. When using “paganism” in this context, we refer to emic Christian polemical discourse,
     where fears of alien (and evil) incursions into, or corruptions of, “True Christianity”
     emerge.
 42. See Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 2. These expressions are the titles of
     the first two chapters of the book, which deal with these developments.


                                                                                               35
egil asprem and kennet granholm



through the ages found a new form in institutional settings.43 A notion of
philosophia perennis has indeed been kept at the base of self-mythologization
in Masonic contexts, and especially in the esoteric orders that were created
during the nineteenth century.44 Furthermore, the many uses of esoteric “tra-
dition” to provide narrative to various countercultural, anti-establishment,
anti-­Enlightenment, and anti-modern discourses of the nineteenth and twen-
tieth centuries may be seen as the outcome of parallel processes of tradition
building and the rejection thereof, occurring during the Reformation and the
Enlightenment.45


“THE ESOTERIC/OCCULT TRADITION”: BETWEEN PRACTICE AND SCHOLARSHIP