I argue that psychical research and its professionalized daughter, parapsychol-
ogy, have offered a uniquely naturalistic mode of enchantment. By moving
certain of the claims and phenomena associated with religious and esoteric
discourses into the laboratory, while at the same time taking them seriously
and attempting to ground them within a worldview that is naturalistic but
not necessarily disenchanted, parapsychology has engaged in what may be
described, with an apt term borrowed from Roy Wallis, as a scientific sani-
tization of these claims.59 The claims are dissociated from their “traditional”
and mythological frameworks, and re-embedded in new, “rational” frames of
reference and legitimizing structures. The result is a scientistic detradition-
alization, along the lines of von Stuckrad’s process of the scientification of
knowledge. Meanwhile resisting the complete reduction of the phenomena to
ordinary and well-understood mechanisms, such as psychopathology, trick-
ery, cognitive biases and self-delusions, some of the mystery is still retained.
This has made the detraditionalized and repackaged paranormal particularly
well-suited for projects to re-enchant science itself, typically by insisting on a
new “scientific revolution” or “paradigm shift”.60
   Having now argued that groups of academics, scientists and other highly
educated persons have been at the heart of this process, it is time to turn again
to the relation with a much broader and popular occulture. “Psychical” or
para­psychological elements have been fed into the fledgling occulture about as
far back as it makes sense to trace it. Partridge has been cautious with delin-
eating the occulture historically, but as a re-enchanted mainstream, it arguably
refers mainly to developments of the late ­twentieth century to the present.
One might, however, identify a “proto-occulture” in the interface between,
say, occultism, spiritualism, mesmerism, psychical research and popular cul-
ture already in the nineteenth century. Particularly towards the end of the cen-
tury, psychic phenomena were stock elements of speculative fiction, including
the late Victorian gothic and science fiction genres.61 In the twentieth century
the relation has renewed and intensified as the discourse on psychic abilities
has changed and new media technologies come into use. With the popularity
boom of spiritualism from World War I and into the 1920s, psychical research
garnered much attention; the popular lecture tours of people like Oliver Lodge
and Arthur Conan Doyle, and the popular writings of someone like Hereward


 59. See Wallis, “Science and Pseudo-Science”; cf. Hess, Science in the New Age.
 60. For an analysis of such calls as discursive strategies in a religio-scientific field, see Asprem,
     “Parapsychology”, 656; cf. Hess, Science in the New Age, 79–81.
 61. See e.g. Willis, Mesmerists, Monsters, and Machines, especially 28–62, 169–200; Luckhurst,
     The Invention of Telepathy, 181–213.



348
                                        psychic enchantments of the educated classes



Carrington brought the sanitized discourse on psychic phenomena to a wider
audience.62 In the 1930s, Joseph Banks Rhine showed himself to be not only
an innovative psychical researcher but also a very deft publicizer. Working
with book clubs, his popular writings on ESP reached a broad public; in the
early days of mass-media communication, he also made frequent appearances
on radio shows, even featuring weekly ESP tests live from the studio.63 The
characteristic “Zener cards” used in his paradigmatic experiments published
in Extra-sensory Perception were soon mass-produced and sold commercially.
By the end of the decade, Rhine’s new parapsychology was known all over the
US, and his new terminology – ESP, psychokinesis, precognition – was gain-
ing currency. The criticism and serious doubts about his results which were
rapidly piling up in the psychological literature could do nothing to stop the
growing notion in the public, advanced by the massive popularization of para-
psychology, that this was scientifically legitimate knowledge.64 In the years fol-
lowing World War II, the interest in what was increasingly being referred to as
“psi” started to filter into new forms of popular culture, even giving rise to the
“psi-fi” subgenre within pulp science fiction.65
   This is where our story of the parapsychological naturalization of the super-
natural comes together again with modern occulture. The sanitized discourse
on the paranormal has made a significant impact on popular cultural produc-
tions of the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, especially in film
and television. As such, they are inscribed centrally in a mode of knowledge
transmission (linked with what von Stuckrad elsewhere in this volume defines
as transformations in “public activation”) which is entirely typical for contem-
porary occulture: the boundary between entertainment and religious expres-
sion and consumption gets blurred, and popular culture becomes a scene for
re-enchantments.
   The main point here is that ideas mediated through the paranormal sub-
genre of popular occulture – what David J. Hess has termed the “paraculture”
– have their origin in the struggles of psychical researchers and parapsychol-
ogists to make such phenomena scientifically legitimate. This, I suggest, has
given the ideas a cultural shape which make them particularly attractive to


 62. Among Carrington’s many and influential books in this field we might mention The Coming
     Science; Personal Experiences in Spiritualism; and his books about the medium Eusapia
     Palladino, e.g. Eusapia Palladino and Her Phenomena. The American author Upton
     Sinclair wrote another influential popular book on psychical research based on telepathic
     experiments with his wife in 1930, Mental Radio. This book has additional significance in
     that it came with a foreword by Albert Einstein.
 63. Mauskopf & McVaugh, The Elusive Science, 160–63, 256. Rhine’s first popular book on
     para­psychology and ESP was published in 1937. See Rhine, New Frontiers of the Mind.
 64. For an overview of the critical responses, see e.g. Mauskopf & McVaugh, “The Controversy
     over Statistics in Parapsychology 1934–1938”; cf. Asprem, “Parapsychology”, 654–5.
 65. See e.g. Kripal, Authors of the Impossible; cf. Hess, Science in the New Age, 120–41.



                                                                                         349
egil asprem



people with higher education. As such, if the contemporary religious land-
scape is being formed into a broad occultural landscape, and if this occulture,
furthermore, is connected with the withering away of “traditional” church reli-
gion, we should not be too surprised to find that the sanitized paranormal
dimension of it is particularly popular among the more highly educated par-
ticipants in occulture.




350
chapter 17

THE NEW KIDS
INDIGO CHILDREN AND NEW AGE DISCOURSE

Daniel Kline




The New Age movement is a religious phenomenon that peaked in the 1980s
and 1990s, a diverse conglomeration of disparate practices that are loosely
bound by the concept of an imminent or present “new age” and by a criti-
cal reaction against rational materialistic explanations of the universe. Wouter
Hanegraaff has painstakingly catalogued many of the practices and beliefs
associated with this designation and many of the major New Age authors in
New Age Religion and Western Culture.1 While much ink has now been spent
on describing this expansive phenomenon and its multiple manifestations,
one area that remains largely untouched is the special role of children within
New Age culture.2
   In particular, I refer to the growth at the end of the twentieth century and
beginning of the twenty-first of the discourse of the “Indigo Child”, a gifted
child who is the harbinger of the coming new age and possessor of special
gifts. In a recent essay, Sarah Whedon submitted the first academic analysis
of the Indigo Child discourse;3 the present work will serve to complement and
expand upon Whedon’s analysis. Additionally, this chapter will address recent
works on Indigo Children, including film and online media, and seek to con-
textualize both New Age authors and their sceptical opponents within this
twentieth- and twenty-first-century discourse on childhood.




   1. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture.
   2. Among the many other authors who have written on New Age over the last two decades
      are Heelas, The New Age Movement; Steven J. Sutcliffe, Children of the New Age; Lewis &
      Melton, Perspectives on the New Age; Bochinger, “New Age” und Moderne Religion.
   3. Whedon, “The Wisdom of Indigo Children”, 60–76.




                                                                                        351
daniel kline



INTRODUCING THE “ESOTERIC CHILD”