LaVey, were ­members of Illuminati-derived orders) like W. B. Yeats and Robert
W. Chambers. This ritual is also supposedly reflected in the work of George
Orwell, H. G. Wells and Aldous Huxley.80 Embedding his rituals in a literary
tradition, LaVey creates cultural legitimacy for them. They are not invented
on the spot, but have the dignity of the literary canon to support them. This
is thus an instance of LaVey using (literary) tradition as a legitimating device.
    LaVey may have lambasted the esotericists of old, but as demonstrated
this does not mean he was blind to the effectiveness of tradition as a pow-
erful tool for creating the right mysterious atmosphere to surround rituals,
and to some extent for general legitimation. This could potentially be viewed
in the light of how one of his heroes, horror author H. P. Lovecraft, created
elaborate pseudo-history concerning his fictitious tome of esoteric lore, The
Necronomicon, in order to generate the right mood (Lovecraft, it is stated in
The Satanic Rituals, was the author of tales “uniquely embellished with pains-
taking pseudo-documentation”).81 It is in this Lovecraftian spirit we should
understand LaVey’s claim about a certain ritual described by him that it was
first performed “in Munich, 31 July 1781; the present manuscript dates from
1887”.82 Likewise, his assertion about the mysterious language used in Satanic
ritual, Enochian, that it is “thought to be older than Sanskrit” is comparable to
how Lovecraft built up his fictional universe.83 The fact that LaVey also pro-
vides rituals based directly on Lovecraft’s fiction should be enough for any-
one to see that he does not make a clear distinction between evocative fiction
and actual historical tradition. In this he is close to Chaos Magicians, who are
(almost) as prone to summon up Donald Duck as a goetic demon.
    Current High Priest Peter H. Gilmore has an unsentimental and detached
view of the historical roots of Satanism. Regarding LaVey’s take on older tradi-
tion, he explains how his mentor would talk of it: “The Doctor [the honorary
title his adherents use when speaking of him] would say: ‘None of it is authen-
tic, but we’ll use whatever props work best.’ … Authenticity was not an issue
for him. He was a showman, he was a practical person”.84 As Gilmore testifies,
tradition was not unimportant for LaVey. On the contrary, it was quite signifi-
cant – as an excellent prop.


 80. Ibid., 78–9. That Yeats was deeply involved in esotericism is well known, but that the orders
     he was a member of were derived from the Illuminati is, to say the least, doubtful.
 81. Ibid., 175 (emphasis added). This passage in the book was written by Michael Aquino, The
     Church of Satan, 691.
 82. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 78.
 83. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 155. Enochian was first presented to the world by Elizabethan
     scholar John Dee, who claimed to have received it in revelations from angels. According to
     Dee, this was the angels’ own language. On Dee, see Håkansson, Seeing the World. LaVey’s
     “Enochian Keys” are based on Aleister Crowley’s reworking of the material. For a full-
     length study of the reception of Dee’s work in modern occultism – including Satanism –
     see Asprem, Arguing with Angels.
 84. Peter H. Gilmore, interview by author, New York, 6 April 2011.


                                                                                              87
per faxneld



MORE TRADITIONAL THAN THOU

LaVey’s often breezy attitude towards tradition prompted many of his later
competitors in the Satanic milieu to contrast themselves with him by making
stronger appeals to tradition. On the one hand, several Lucifer-loving persons
reading LaVey were probably genuinely incensed by his cheerful impudence
when handling the esoteric tradition, and perhaps felt a longing for something
more “genuine”, “mysterious” and “classic”. On the other hand, their appeals to
ancient arcane wisdom and secret lineages are quite possibly also a conscious
strategy to build legitimacy in a way differing from LaVey’s successful methods
(appeals to rationality/science, personal charisma, and only to a lesser extent
tradition).85 This can be seen in groups like the Order of the Nine Angles,
probably founded in the late 1960s, who designate themselves practitioners
of “Traditional Satanism”, a self-description also used by several later theistic
Satanist groups like The Brotherhood of Satan.86
   LaVey has described how he looked for Satanists before founding the
Church of Satan, but did not find any.87 This is similar to how Graham Harvey
speculates that Gerald Gardner searched for “traditional Witches”, but without
much success. Eventually, after the founding of Wicca, others stepped forward
and proclaimed they, unlike Gardner, were in fact truly traditional Witches.88
Exactly the same thing happened in the case of Satanism.
   It is worth noting that Satanism shares many traits with Wicca and the
wider milieu of neopaganism when it comes to handling tradition. As Harvey
has pointed out, neopagans “are usually fully aware of the disjunctions
between the past and the present”, and know very well that they are making
a reconstruction based on scanty sources.89 Harvey also mentions neopagans
who construct rituals based on Star Trek, something that can be considered
analogous to LaVey’s Lovecraft rituals.90 The very fact that neopaganism is an
invented tradition can also be considered part of its appeal, since people can
then freely continue inventing.91 This can potentially apply to Satanism too.
   It cannot be ignored that many Satanists, in spite of being aware that LaVey
assembled rituals from a hodgepodge of historical sources, literary as well as
esoteric, but non-Satanic, just like the neopagans discussed by Harvey, seem


 85. On LaVey’s legitimation strategies, see Lewis, Legitimating New Religions.
 86. On the Order of the Nine Angles, see Senholt, “Secret Identities in the Sinister Tradition”.
 87. Barton, The Secret Life of a Satanist, 61.
 88. Harvey, “Inventing Paganisms”, 282.
 89. Ibid., 279.
 90. Ibid., 289. There is of course still a noticeable difference between the completely open
     admission of invention in Star Trek-based neopaganism, or for that matter Chaos Magick
     astral journeys to Narnia, and the way tradition and popular culture is used in the Church
     of Satan.
 91. Ibid., 281.



88
                                                 secret lineages and de facto satanists



“to find authenticity in alleged historicity”. To Harvey, there is an inherent
paradox in consciously creating rituals “to provide a semblance of antiquity”.92
If neopagans have similar ideas as LaVey, as I suspect at least some of them
do, the paradox is dissolved. The “willing suspension of disbelief ” in the ritual
context then becomes an instrument to make the rituals more effective, even
if the participant in some other contexts may be a conscientious philological
scholar of his own religion (something not uncommon among neopagans, but
less so in the Church of Satan). Harvey suggests we must consider “role-play,
play-acting, active imagination, and creativity” important processes in neo­
paganism.93 This no doubt holds true for the Church of Satan and its approach
to tradition as well.
    Seldom will you hear a founder in a (more or less) religious context state
frankly “I simply made this stuff up just now”. LaVey does not say so either,
though he not-so-tacitly admits to freely picking and choosing whatever is fun
and colourful from older tradition, without any pretence at mystical insight
concerning the material. In a more classically esoteric context, this would
never be the case. Still, tradition is something constantly being renegotiated in
a world such as the present one, even among those ­esotericists that may appear
to be of a slightly more traditional bent. When I interviewed prominent Left-
Hand Path adherents Zeena (estranged daughter of Anton LaVey) and Nikolas
Schreck in 2005, they were very clear that they would happily modify their
beliefs and practices in accordance with any new convincing scholarly findings
pertaining to the Egyptian god Set, the main focus of their spirituality.94 Their
emphasis on “correct” tradition therefore leads to their own worldview being
open to shifts in academic opinions concerning the ancient religious material
they are employing to construct “tradition”.
    LaVey would never have felt any need to make changes in his system to
harmonize it with the latest word from academia. This holds equally true for
many old-fashioned esotericists as well. Since Rudolf Steiner was able to gain
mystical insights about the Guardian of the Threshold, research demonstrat-
ing the fact that this concept was derived from the fiction of Edward Bulwer-
Lytton would to an Anthroposophist simply be a reflection of the scholar’s
lacking mystical abilities that hinder a higher understanding of esoteric tra-
dition. LaVey’s reasons for being able to stay aloof are different. Bluntly put,
esoteric tradition is simply fun fluff to him, helping to create an appropri-
ate atmosphere for his activities, just like plastic devil-horns, fake skulls, and
arcane symbols. The potential psychological effects of silly costumes and play-
ful constructions of tradition are, however, anything but a joke to LaVey.



 92. Ibid., 288.
 93. Ibid., 289.
 94. Nikolas and Zeena Schreck, interview by author, Berlin, Germany, 28 April 2005.



                                                                                       89
per faxneld



CONCLUSION