This naturalized representation of the virtual environment allows for a more
 convincing experience. Second Life also allows two views – one of the body of
 the avatar and the other through the eyes of the avatar. This reinforces a per-
 ception of physical presence in the virtual. However, in contradistinction to
 the earlier nineteenth-century understanding of the self, Murray and Sixsmith
 argue that what virtual reality users experience is not a projection of the sub-
 jective self into the virtual world as the nineteenth-century occultists did.
 Instead, a model is offered where the subjective understanding of the body’s
 boundaries become malleable and ambiguous. They use a phenomenological
 model because “it is concerned with perception and bodily activity, enabling
 the exploration of phenomena as they are lived and experienced”.58 With this
 understanding of the body, and building on research in which users of pros-
 thetic devices come to see the mechanical limb as part of their body, Murray
 and Sixsmith argue that a phenomenological polymorphic understanding of
 the body is necessary because it “reveals that the body in the world is both
 foreground and background. It constitutes our locus, so that we are ‘here,’
 rather than ‘there.’ Yet, at the same time, the body recedes from conscious
 reflection.”59 This means that the body is both present and distant, allowing the
participant in the virtual environment to use their body, for instance to view
the screen and use a mouse, but also to be distanced from it and present in the
virtual world, interacting with others. As they note, “[a] sense of presence, of
being there in virtual environments … calls for a dampening of awareness in
reality and a heightening acceptance of the surrounding virtuality”.60 This dis-
tancing process becomes easier as the individual becomes more comfortable
with technology.
    This comfort level is most evident in the generations growing up with
­digital technology. Being a significant issue for educators, cognitive scientists


 56.   Murray & Sixsmith, “The Corporeal Body in Virtual Reality”, 320–22.
 57.   Ibid., 320.
 58.   Ibid., 322.
 59.   Ibid., 323.
 60.   Ibid., 324.


                                                                                  173
john l . crow



have been examining the ways digital technologies affect children in regard to
learning. They have found that not only does immersion in digital technologi-
cal environments stress some skills over others, it physiologically changes the
brain. There is an increase in the density of neurological connections in the
areas of the brain used for experiencing virtual environments. However, as
Marc Prensky, a specialist in digital learning, writes, “these differences … are
less a matter of kind than a difference of degree”.61 Nevertheless, these changes
are significant because the exposure to digital environments improve the very
mental skills needed to traverse virtual worlds. The thinking skills enhanced
by repeated exposure to computer games and other digital media include:

      reading visual images as representations of three-dimensional
      space (representational competence), multidimensional visual-
      spatial skills, mental maps, “mental paper folding” (i.e. pictur-
      ing the results of various origami-like folds in your mind without
      actually doing them), “inductive discovery” (i.e. making observa-
      tions, formulating hypotheses and figuring out the rules governing
      the behavior of a dynamic representation), “attentional deploy-
      ment” (such as monitoring multiple locations simultaneously), and
      responding faster to expected and unexpected stimuli.62

Moreover, events experienced while immersed in the digital environment can
have direct psychological and physiological feedback within the body. This
kind of feedback from the virtual is noted by Chris Dede in Science:

      Inducing a participant’s symbolic immersion involves triggering
      powerful semantic, psychological associations by means of the con-
      tent of an experience. As an illustration, digitally fighting a terrify-
      ing, horrible virtual monster can build a mounting sense of fear, even
      though one’s physical context is unchanging and rationally safe.63

In many examples, Dede points to highly immersive three-dimensional envi-
ronments, such as using headsets or panoramic displays. However, as Ciaran
Scott Hill of the Institute of Neurology, University College London, replied,
children already have these kinds of immersive environments with commer-
cially available game consoles. He writes:

      the opportunity for motor skill development by immersive inter-
      faces is not limited to specialist training – the Nintendo Wii con-
      sole is one example of a commercially available games system that

 61. Prensky, “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants, Part II”.
 62. Ibid.
 63. Dede, “Immersive Interfaces for Engagement and Learning”, 66.


174
                                       accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



      integrates hand and, in some cases, whole body movements in a
      range of simulated environments.64

Indeed, the view that the whole environment needs to be simulated ignores
the fact that a focus can be centred on a set of stimuli with the exclusion of
the surrounding environment. It is no different than being absorbed in a book,
movie, or television show to the point that one’s surroundings are temporar-
ily forgotten. Thus, while the three-dimensional virtual immersion experience
was rudimentary initially, its sophistication, matched with the heightened
skills and familiarity with technology by the last couple of digital generations,
have acculturated many to allow their sense of self to become malleable and to
be able to operate in the physical world while simultaneously existing subjec-
tively embodied to varying degrees in a virtual environment interacting with
others in a virtual world creating community.


VIRTUAL RELIGION, RITUAL AND ASTRAL TRAVEL IN SECOND LIFE

As noted earlier, the Internet was used for religious purposes right from its
inception and this trend has increased since. Thus it is not surprising to find
myriad religious traditions and communities bringing their practices and
beliefs into the virtual world of Second Life. Kerstin Radde-Antweiler and
Simon Jenkins, both scholars publishing in Online: Heidelberg Journal of
Religions on the Internet, have made extensive studies of religion and ritual
in three-dimensional virtual worlds, with Radde-Antweiler specifically focus-
ing on Second Life. What they found was that, indeed, numerous people have
participated in online religious rituals and have had, to some degree, satisfying
experiences. Jenkins notes comments from participants, such as “I was touched
by how everyone ‘fell silent’ for the duration of the service” and that many
felt a “reverence in the services”.65 He continued to note how the textual input
of the Lord’s Prayer allowed the participants to bond and form community:

      The experience of praying the Lord’s Prayer together focused atten-
      tion on our togetherness in prayer and worship, despite our dis-
      tance in terms of geography, culture, language and faith expression.
      The people sitting on either side of you in a Church of Fools pew
      could be from Melbourne and Kansas City, and yet here you were,
      sitting in the same imaginative space, and being able to talk and
      pray together, even though you would probably never meet each
      other face to face in the physical world.66

 64. Ciaran Scott Hill, “Developing Psychomotor Skills the Wii Way”.
 65. Jenkins, “Rituals and Pixels”, 108.
 66. Ibid., 109.


                                                                                175
john l . crow



Similar to Jenkins, Radde-Antweiler notes that there have been numerous
“clusters” of religiosity in Second Life. She documents the Jewish, Christian,
Muslim, New Age, Buddhist and Hindu clusters, which offer information
and a variety of services.67 For instance, in one virtual temple the participant
can have his/her avatar meditate in front of the digital representation of the
Hindu God Ganesh. Radde-Antweiler also notes how the Second Temple in
Jerusalem, destroyed by the Romans in 70 ce, has been rebuilt. When entering
the temple a digital note greets the visitor:

      Welcome to our Holy City. Outside you will see the walls of a full-
      scale reconstruction of the Second Temple that stood in Jerusalem
      until the year 70. To experience the size of the building move
      around in mouse-mode: it will be you walking through the gates.68