Virtue suggests that these gifts may be artistic, musical or emotional, and
that the gifts will often manifest in an unorthodox manner, often working
outside the established system. She gives an example of children who “may
flunk music classes because they can’t memorize musical scales, but after
school, they might compose the most beautiful music at home on their musi-
cal instruments, using their inner senses”.35 In addition to their spiritual gifts,
Indigos are described by Virtue as “sensitive to a fault” and exceptionally sen-
sitive to two things in particular: truth and toxins. She describes Indigos as
possessing a “spiritual B.S. detector”36 and indicates that this is part of their
“remarkable psychic abilities and is a huge part of their Life Purpose”.37 When
lied to or treated with insincerity Indigos become aggressive or isolated. The
second Indigo sensitivity according to Virtue, and the subject for a large por-
tion of her book, is their difficulty in dealing with “environmental toxins”.38


 32. Ibid., 20.
 33. Doreen Virtue in Indigo Evolution.
 34. Virtue, The Care and Feeding of Indigo Children, 10.
 35. Ibid.
 36. Ibid., 11; Virtue did not originate this term but rather cites it as derived from the work of
     Sam Keen.
 37. Ibid.
 38. Ibid., 12.


358
                                                                               the new kids



Virtue says that Indigo Children are “natural children in an unnatural world”
and that many of them are “experiencing their first lifetime on planet Earth,
and their immune systems (physically and emotionally) aren’t able to assimi-
late the earthly toxins in food, water, air, toiletries, cleaning supplies, artificial
lighting and relationships”.39 Here Virtue seems to suggest that immunology is
related to the incarnation cycle, and that souls become familiar with “environ-
mental toxins” and become more able to deal with them in the next life.
   Tappe, the first person to identify the Indigos, outlines a potential dark side
to these children. She says that they have the potential for great evil and to
become dangerous, and that “These young children – every one of them I’ve
seen thus far who kill their schoolmates or parents – have been Indigos.”40 This
outlines an area of the Indigo Child discourse not commonly emphasized: the
potential for the Indigos to become a danger to society rather than solely a
source of its salvation. Another important aspect of the Indigo discourse is the
connection with ADHD and the revaluing of these children who are marked
as problem children by the educational system.


INDIGOS AND ATTENTION DEFICIT WITH HYPERACTIVITY DISORDER

The discourse of the Indigo Child is almost universally associated with chil-
dren who have been diagnosed with ADD or ADHD. This is an integral aspect
to the phenomenon and represents a “recasting” of a socially stigmatized trait
into an indicator for spiritual election. Whedon describes this process as “a
restoration of the value of special children through a proactive inversion of
meaning”.41 She describes how in the 1990s certain children were “turned
into monsters or the incurably ill” by the dual factors of school violence and
the rising diagnoses of ADD.42 The Indigo Child discourse of the late 1990s
is an inversion of this trend towards pathologizing children. It is estimated
from recent surveys conducted by the American National Center for Health
Statistics that 8.4 per cent of children aged 5–17 were diagnosed with ADHD
in 2006.43 In response to these statistics it seems safe to say that children being
diagnosed with ADHD is a relatively common experience in American cul-
ture, and perhaps global culture.44 The child is often first acknowledged as
potentially ADHD in the classroom. They are perceived to be a “problem


 39. Ibid.
 40. Carroll & Tober, Indigo Children, 9.
 41. Whedon, “The Wisdom of Indigo Children”, 61.
 42. Ibid., 62.
 43. Pastor & Reuben, “Diagnosed Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Learning
     Disability”.
 44. Statistics for global prevalence of ADHD can be found in Polanczyk et al., “The Worldwide
     Prevalence of ADHD”.


                                                                                         359
daniel kline



child”, one who has difficulty paying attention, requires special treatment and
may need disciplinary action. This classroom assessment leads to psychiatric
consultation and a large portion of the children diagnosed with ADHD end up
being treated with pharmaceuticals, in particular with Ritalin. In addition to
this, the stigma of a mental illness diagnosis becomes part of their identity and
these diagnoses are rarely reassessed; ADHD treatment is often life-long and
as with many mental disorders it is rarely deemed to be “cured”.45
   Within New Age discourse there is a rejection of the “Western scientific”
model of medicine and its associated reliance upon pharmaceuticals.46 This
rejection of “materialist” answers is typified in the Indigo Child discourse
wherein diagnosis as attention deficit becomes an indicator of the child’s spe-
cial status as an Indigo. Thus a parent or friend of the child can cease to view
the child as a problem, a child with a disadvantage, and instead view them as
special or gifted and simply in need of unique training. There is also, within
the Indigo Child discourse, a critique of the Western educational system with
its inability to provide the individual care needed to help these children or
teach them in the way they need to be taught.47 In this way, Indigo Children,
in addition to their role in New Age discourse, are part of a larger anti-­medical
discourse, opposing the psychiatric and medical establishment in its diag-
nosing and medication of children.48 Sandra Sedgbeer provides an excellent
example of this cultural critique in her interview for the documentary film
Indigo Evolution (which will be discussed in more detail later in this chapter),
in which she describes the reason for labelling children as Indigo: “If we don’t
label them, other people will. They are already being labelled dyslexic, autistic,
disruptive, troublesome, ADD, ADHD, problem children and I think that if we
don’t create a different kind of label for them then mainstream society will.”49
Sedgbeer is describing exactly this process of recasting, of creating a new role
for these “problem children”.
   In the interview, Sedgebeer is responding to a discourse around the prob-
lem of labelling children as Indigos. Primarily, the discussion consists of an
acknowledgement of the pressures put upon children by the label of Indigo.
More generally this discussion is participating in a discourse of critique
in which labelling is perceived as inherently negative and part of the main-
stream scientific approach, thus even the label Indigo is seen as negative. The
mainstream scientific approach is portrayed as in conflict with the “holistic”
approach that is championed by New Age enthusiasts.50


 45.   Baren, “Multimodal treatment for ADHD”.
 46.   Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 43–4.
 47.   Carroll & Tober, Indigo Children, 95.
 48.   Other examples of this discourse are books such as Caplan, They Say You’re Crazy.
 49.   Indigo Evolution.
 50.   For a discussion of the concept of holism within New Age discourse see Hanegraaff, New
       Age Religion and Western Culture, 119.


360
                                                                                  the new kids



   A second example of the inversion or recasting of problem children comes
from Doreen Virtue. Her recasting is literal, as well as value-based, in that
she reinterprets the acronym ADHD as “Attention Dialed in to a Higher
Dimension”.51


KEY FIGURES IN THE INDIGO DISCOURSE