in ghosts was expressed by 38 per cent, astrology by 28 per cent and reincar-
nation by 25 per cent of the total sample.21
    As will be seen in the next section of this chapter, the term “extra-sensory
perception” was coined by the founders of American experimental para­
psychology in the 1930s, and it is, strictly speaking, an umbrella term for the
parapsychological phenomena of anomalous perception. While there is no
reason to suspect the general respondent of the Gallup polls to know all the
niceties of parapsychological technical vocabulary, it is not surprising to find
that both telepathy and clairvoyance score lower than general ESP, a class of
which they are (technically speaking) subsets. Nevertheless, at 36 per cent
(telepathy) and 32 per cent (clairvoyance) asserting belief in them, these are
still very widespread paranormal beliefs on their own. A similar study from
2005 confirms this general picture: leaving out beliefs that are clearly rooted
in “traditional” religious worldviews, ESP is the number one paranormal phe-
nomenon Americans believe in.22
    Non-denominational paranormal beliefs are in other words widespread;
this much we would already expect from their being part of the pop-occultural
mainstream. But the Gallup statistics from 2001 have the additional advantage
of being broken down by demographical factors, including educational level.
This gives us a way to assess one major question: just how disenchanted are
the educated elites?
    Keeping the polls of the religious beliefs of scientists cited above firmly in
mind, one would expect beliefs clearly connected to traditional religious com-
munities and mythological frameworks to decrease somewhat with educa-
tional level. Indeed the general tendency seems to be that less ambiguously
“supernatural” beliefs, such as the belief in ghosts, haunted houses and com-
munication with the dead, but also belief in astrology and extraterrestrial vis-
its to Earth, generally decrease as the educational level increases from high
school level towards college graduate and post-graduate level. Some inter-
esting differences surface when we compare these generally quite heavily
mythologized elements with less embedded parapsychological ones. Table
16.1 shows the distribution of belief in the three core parapsychological phe-
nomena included in the poll (ESP, telepathy and clairvoyance), and one ele-
ment more typically associated with traditional church religion (“that people
on this earth are sometimes possessed by the devil”). I have also included the

     medical doctor who, with basis in countless controlled medical trials considers the placebo
     effect to be a well-documented effect of self-healing would qualify as having a “paranormal
     belief ”. However, belief in the reality of placebos should hardly classify as paranormal in this
     context.
 21. For all the numbers, see Newport & Strausberg, “Americans’ Belief in Psychic and
     Paranormal Phenomena Is up Over Last Decade”.
 22. This means leaving out “demonic possession”, which was more widespread than ESP in the
     2005 poll (but, somewhat curiously, far from it in 2001). For the 2005 data, see David W.
     Moore, “Three in Four Americans Believe in Paranormal”.


336
                                            psychic enchantments of the educated classes


Table 16.1 Distribution of belief in three parapsychological beliefs and one “traditionally
religious” belief over educational factors and self-reported importance of religion.

Belief                      Education                      Importance of religion         Total
                 Post-   College Some High        Very      Fairly   Not very
               graduate graduate college school important important important
                          only           or less
Possession        32         35        41       46        55           28          14      41
ESP               52         53        48       49        50           48          48      50
Telepathy         41         38        36       35        35           37          41      36
Clairvoyance      29         27        34       34        32           33          32      32
Data show percentage of respondents confirming belief.
Source: Newport & Strausberg, “Americans’ Belief in Psychic and Paranormal Phenomena Is up Over
Last Decade”.



­ istribution over two demographical factors (namely educational level and the
d
level of importance the respondent attributed to religion).
    Belief in demonic possession has a clear negative correlation with higher
education: whereas 46 per cent of those with only high school or less believed
that the devil could sometimes possess human beings, the percentage
decreases steadily as we move to demographical groups with college educa-
tions. One may perhaps still be surprised to find that every third American
with post-graduate education believes in demonic possession; however, pos-
session is a standard part of American evangelical Christianity, and is not
uncommon among Catholics or mainline Protestants either.23
    It seems that the “international subculture composed of people with
Western-type higher education”, also outside of the more restrictive class of
“scientists”, are increasingly less likely to entertain the “traditional” supernatu-
ral enchantments than the rest of the population is. What, then, about para-
psychological beliefs? As we see in Table 16.1, belief in ESP is relatively stable
around 50 per cent of the population for all educational groups, with the
higher levels of education (college and post-graduate) actually scoring slightly
higher than those with no education beyond high school. For telepathy, this
tendency is even more marked, with a steady increase from 35 per cent of
those with high school or less education, to a full 41 per cent of those with
post-graduate educations expressing that telepathy is real. Belief in clairvoy-
ance is also relatively stable, but more ambiguous in its relation to education;
while college graduates generally are a few per cent less likely to believe than
those with no college, post-graduates score higher than those with only gradu-
ate level college education.
    Besides the question of education, the importance attributed to religion
by these respondents also gives us some valuable pointers. With possession

 23. See e.g. Cuneo, American Exorcism.


                                                                                           337
egil asprem



the correlation with religious belief seems to be essential, as only 14 per cent
of those who do not think religion is important believe in it. This is not the
case for parapsychological beliefs. For ESP and clairvoyance, the importance
attached to religion does not seem to predict belief: people are about as likely
to believe in ESP whether they find religion important or not. For telepathy
(which also correlated positively with education) we even notice a negative
correlation with the expressed importance of religion, with 41 per cent of
those expressing little interest in religion believing in telepathy, against 36 per
cent in the general population. Thus we note with some interest that two cri-
teria tend to increase likelihood of belief in telepathy, namely a high education
and an expressed low interest in “religion”.


Interpretations and problems

These findings have not gone completely unnoticed by sociologists and psy-
chologists interested in paranormal beliefs and religion. Paranormal beliefs are,
as we have seen already, often subdivided into “religious” and “classic” types,
where the first denotes elements that are “central to traditional Christian doc-
trine”, whereas the latter are “commonly associated with the supernatural or
the occult”.24 These two groups of paranormal belief correlate differently with
social factors; while the “religious” type seems much more common among
marginal groups and correlates with lower education and socio-economic sta-
tus, the “classic” lacks any such pattern.25 In short, while relative deprivation
largely correlates with the religious type, it does not help predict “classic para­
normal beliefs”.
   Related to the deprivation theory is the idea that belief in the paranormal
and in “pseudosciences” is simply a matter of scientific illiteracy. If people
know more about science, they will tend to believe less in the paranormal.
Again, the data we have examined above do not support this interpretation.
This has caused some concern for educationalists. For example, Massimo
Pigliucci observed in the McGill Journal of Education in 2007 that

      scientists and science educators often assume that a major reason
      so many people believe in pseudoscience is that they do not know
      enough science. However, although the latter is an accurate empir-
      ical observation (most people do not know much about science), it
      does not follow that scientific illiteracy is the cause of widespread
      belief in all sorts of paranormal phenomena. If lack of scientific
      knowledge is not the root cause, then more science education will
      not necessarily solve, or even ameliorate, the problem. 26

 24. Rice, “Believe It Or Not”, 96–7.
 25. Ibid., 96; cf. Goode, Paranormal Beliefs.
 26. Pigliucci, “The Evolution–Creation Wars”, 291.

338
                                        psychic enchantments of the educated classes



Pigliucci also takes note of the difference between the “religious” and “non-
religious” based types of paranormal belief, and the discrepancy in how they
relate to science education, suggesting that “This means factors other than just
the general degree of education are at play.”27 From an educational perspective,
Pigliucci argues that the resilience of paranormal beliefs (he is particularly dis-
turbed by the fact that “one in every four or five of the most educated people
in the most prosperous country in the world” believes in demonic possession)
among the educated classes means that something is wrong with the educa-
tional system itself. Based on his own surveys Pigliucci observes that science
majors are much more likely to believe in paranormal phenomena than majors
in psychology and philosophy, a difference which he attributes to differences
in educational strategies. While philosophy and psychology majors “actually
take courses on the scientific method and on critical thinking”,