In general, there were two types of astral travel in the nineteenth and early
twentieth centuries. The first was when the individual left his or her body
and travelled in the astral level of the material world, either in terms of the
present, but also in the past and future. For the purposes of this chapter, I
shall label this type of astral travel “geo-temporal astral travel”. The other kind
is where the individual travelled in a world very different from the material
one; an environment controlled by symbols and symbolic correspondences
rather than natural laws. I label this type of astral travel “symbolic astral travel”.
Two examples of these kinds of astral travel can be found in the Theosophical
Society and the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn respectively. While both
groups engaged in each type of astral travel, the members of the Theosophical
Society were more concerned with issues regarding the astral and its relation
to the material world. In contrast, the members of the Golden Dawn under-
stood their astral travel experiences as part of a magical and initiatory context
where travelling on the astral plane helped develop a deeper understanding of
the self and the universe.
   While Theosophical literature has many examples of astral travel, the
recorded experiences of two prominent members are illustrative. First, William
Quan Judge (1851–96) headed the US branch of the society until his death
in 1896. The other is Charles Webster Leadbeater (1854–1934), who, next to
the co-founder of the society, Helena Petrovna Blavatsky (1831–91), was one
of the most prolific occultists to develop Theo­soph­ical doctrine. Within the
Theosophical conception of the world, the astral plane was ­simply another


 17. Corrigan, Business of the Heart, 3; Russett, Sexual Science, 197.
 18. Corrigan, Business of the Heart, 3.


164
                                          accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



dimension of the physical world, but one not controlled by the ordinary laws
of physics. When the double travelled, it travelled in the astral dimension of
the physical world. Yet the two were so close that when the double left the
physical body it could see the material world as if it was looking at it while
embodied. Those in the material world could also see the double, which gen-
erally looked like the physical body, including clothing. Moreover, in the early
years of the society, astral travelling (or “liberating the double”, as it was called)
was seen as the highest possible achievement in magic.19
   When Judge gave a lecture in 1876 about his experiments with astral pro-
jection, published in the May 1877 issue of Psychische Studien, it was given
within this context.20 He describes the experiments he had performed up until
that time, and in each of these Judge’s body is left behind, usually sleeping, but
his double roams freely. He describes one instance as follows:

        One evening I lay down in Madame Blavatsky’s, intending to try to
        see if I could get out of my body. The bystanders said that in a few
        minutes I snored very loudly, but with me it was totally different. I
        could notice no break of unconsciousness, nor a moment of sleepi-
        ness. It seemed to me as though I was awake and standing up to go
        out into the hall, and that a handkerchief lay over my eyes just as
        I had placed it when lying down. An effort to throw off the obsta-
        cle was unsuccessful, and so I went out into the hall down which I
        thought to go to see my body in the kitchen, and there I threw off
        the handkerchief through a mighty effort – whereupon I imme-
        diately again found myself where I had laid myself down, in the
        laughter of those watching who had heard my unmusical snoring.21

In another example Judge not only roams free from his body but his double
can be seen by others. He states “that while my body was snoring, my dou-
ble, or simulacrum, scin lecca, or whatever you might call it, which is a visible
exact replica of me, could be seen as it went down the way to the kitchen”.22 In
both examples his body slept, unconscious of his surroundings, while his dou-
ble roamed the halls freely.
   Judge’s descriptions of his geo-temporal astral travel are similar to those
attributed to Leadbeater. In 1909 Leadbeater met Jiddu Krishnamurti (1895–
1986), and claimed that through his clairvoyance he could see that one day
Krishnamurti would be the next world teacher.23 Leadbeater claimed to have
astrally travelled back in time to view the past lives of Krishnamurti, and these


 19.   Deveney, Astral Projection or Liberation of the Double, 17.
 20.   For the text of the lecture, see Deveney, “An Unpublished Lecture by W. Q. Judge”.
 21.   Ibid., 15.
 22.   Ibid.
 23.   See Jayakar, Krishnamurti, particularly chapter 2.


                                                                                            165
john l . crow



accounts were subsequently published as The Lives of Alcyone in the society’s
journal, The Theosophist, beginning in 1910. In 1947, Earnest Wood (1883–
1965), Leadbeater’s assistant, published a small pamphlet which described the
ways in which Leadbeater travelled astrally. Wood’s first example describes
Leadbeater as being suddenly contacted on the astral regarding an emergency.
In response Leadbeater told Wood, “[c]all me if I am not back in ten minutes”.
He then went to sleep. Upon awakening Leadbeater described how he had
assisted some astral “boys” preventing a person from committing suicide.24
Another time Wood was assisting Leadbeater with a project when the latter
suddenly “slip[ped] out of his body apparently unintentionally” and seemed
“fast asleep with his eyes closed”. However, within minutes Leadbeater awoke,
claiming that while he seemed asleep he was still dictating to Wood. Thus
Leadbeater was forced to “go over the missing portion again”.25
    These examples of geo-temporal astral travel demonstrate that, according
to the Theosophists involved, it was an activity the double partook in while
the physical body was asleep. Moreover, the double could travel in this world,
being visible or invisible, and in the present as well as forward and backward in
time.26 Geo-temporal astral travel also allowed the astral traveller to see others
and at times interact with them in limited ways. This form of astral travel dif-
fered significantly from the symbolic astral travel undertaken by members of
the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn.
    Unlike the Theosophists mentioned above, the symbolic astral travel was
experienced while awake. The Golden Dawn’s internal organizational instruc-
tions, called “Flying Rolls”, give detailed instructions as to how to interact with
the astral as well as examples of what one should experience. The Golden
Dawn divided their astral work into three types: Descrying in the Spirit Vision,
Astral Projection, and Rising on the Planes.27 This section will briefly focus on
one example where a member entered a symbolic astral environment using a
tarot card as a portal.
    The narrative of this astral experience, an example of Descrying in the Spirit
Vision, was given in Flying Roll No. IV. In it two female Golden Dawn initi-
ates, Soror SSDD (Florence Farr Emery, 1860–1917) and Soror Fidelis (Elaine
Simpson), describe the process of entering the astral plane. First, the traveller
is to enter a room and sit still meditating for a period of time. Then prelimi-
nary magical rituals are performed, a tarot trump to astrally explore is chosen,
and then the card is studied. After a while this studying can be continued with


 24. Wood, Clairvoyant Investigations, 8.
 25. Ibid., 11.
 26. Wood also describes the events in which Leadbeater travelled forward in time describing
     the upcoming sixth root-race in which humans had evolved to be very different creatures
     than they are today. These results were published as Leadbeater & Besant, The Beginnings of
     the Sixth Root Race (1931).
 27. King, Astral Projections, Ritual Magic, and Alchemy, 76


166
                                  accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



the eyes closed. At the point where the member feels “a state of reverie” she
imaginatively steps into the tarot card and begins symbolic astral travel. The
initial part of an example is as follows: