The Tarot Trump, the Empress was taken; placed before the per-
       sons and contemplated upon, spiritualized, heightened in coloring,
       purified in design and idealized. In vibratory manner pronounced
       Daleth. Then, in spirit, saw a greenish blue distant landscape, sug-
       gestive of the mediaeval tapestry. Effort to ascend was then made;
       rising on the planes seemed to pass up through clouds and then
       appeared a pale green landscape and in its midst a gothic temple
       of ghostly outlines marked with light. Approached it and found the
       temple gained in definiteness and was concrete, and seemed a solid
       structure. … Opposite the entrance perceived a cross with three
       bars and a dove upon it; and beside this, were steps leading for-
       wards into the dark, by a dark passage. Here was met a beautiful
       green dragon, who moved aside, meaning no harm, and the spirit
       vision passed on. Turning a corner … there appeared a woman of
       heroic proportions, clothed in green with a jewelled girdle, crown
       of stars on her head, in her hand a sceptre of gold, having at one
       apex a lustrously white closed lotus flower; in her left hand an
       orb bearing a cross. She also had a shield with a dove upon it. She
       smiled proudly, and as the human spirit sought her name, replied:
       I am the mighty Mother Isis; most powerful of all the worlds, I am
       she who fights not, but is always victorious.28

The vision continues for some time, ending with a message of universal love,
a theme attributed to the Empress Tarot card. With the presence of a dragon
and the Egyptian goddess Isis, symbolic astral travel operates in an environ-
ment not connected directly with the physical world but rather in a fantastic or
mythical one. It is an imaginary world where individuals can fly and encoun-
ter myriad entities, including angels, monsters, gods and goddesses. While the
realm may seem completely dreamlike and plastic, this was not how it was
understood by occultists. These symbolic astral realms have rules and laws.
Certain actions, rituals and words brought from the physical world obtain
great effects in the astral. Moreover, these realms are bounded by a complex
set of symbolic correspondences. These limits predetermined the experience
of the astral. Nevertheless, symbolic astral travel was generally practised indi-
vidually with results frequently being recorded afterwards.




 28. Ibid., 72.


                                                                              167
john l . crow



RELIGIOSITY IN THE ASTRAL AND THE INTERNET

Before continuing the examination of the cyberastral plane, it is necessary to
take a moment to follow the trajectory of religious development in the late
twentieth century. Two important factors need to be explicated. The first is
the transference of astral travel to a larger cultural and religious context. The
second is the emergence of religious activity online. Much has been written
about the 1960s and the occult revival, where nineteenth-century occultism
was combined with an emergence of neopaganism and the incorporation of
Eastern religions such as Zen Buddhism. Notions of the astral were part of this
cluster of ideas and were gradually diffused into a larger religious context.
   Within neopaganism, the astral plane became fused with traditions claimed
to trace back to ancient times. One of the most important figures for modern
neopaganism is the British civil servant Gerald B. Gardner (1884–1964). Prior
to founding Wicca in the 1950s, Gardner was involved with individuals who
traced their occult and religious practices back to the Theosophical Society, the
Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, Ordo Templi Orientis, Aleister Crowley
and older occult or esoteric traditions.29 It was through these channels that we
find Gardner incorporating numerous occult doctrines into Wicca, which sub-
sequently disseminated into the larger neopagan milieu. One example can be
found in A Witches’ Bible Complete, written by Janet and Stewart Farrar, influ-
ential figures in modern neopaganism and Wicca. Quoting from Gardner’s
Book of Shadows, his magical ritual book, the Farrars detail Gardner’s instruc-
tions “To Leave the Body”. They write that the purpose of this practice is “to
help bring about what may variously be called clairvoyance, expansion of con-
sciousness, opening up the levels, opening the Third Eye, or communication
with the Goddess; and, at a more advanced stage, astral projection”.30
   Neopaganism was not the only tradition to absorb notions of the astral.
As Hanegraaff observes, a central aspect of New Age religion is the belief in
“other realities” which can be accessed freely by human beings. This he notes
can be accomplished through what he labels “Altered States of Consciousness”
(ASC).31 In these altered states of consciousness, New Age practitioners expe-
rience other realities, frequently similar to experiences described above in
both symbolic and geo-temporal astral travel. Throughout the twentieth cen-
tury, occult practices and worldviews diffused and were adopted and incorpo-
rated into a variety of New Age religions.32 As Hanegraaff notes, the complex


 29. See Philip G. Davis, Goddess Unmasked, chapter 14. See also Kaczynski, Perdurabo, chapter
     22, for Gardner’s relationship with Crowley.
 30. Farrar & Farrar, A Witches’ Bible, II: 60.
 31. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 259–62. See also Chapter 19 of the
     present volume.
 32. See Pike, New Age and Neopagan Religions in America, chapter 3, where she meticulously
     traces New Age and neopagan practices back through nineteenth-century America and
     Europe.

168
                                        accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



hierarchy of worlds developed by the Theosophical Society compare to the
view found in New Age religion.33 Various aspects of the astral have also been
incorporated into New Age channelling practices where, as Michael F. Brown
describes, “practitioners believe that they can use altered states of conscious-
ness to connect to wisdom emanating from the collective unconsciousness or
even from other planets, dimensions, or historical eras”.34 Brown traces New
Age channelling back to Spiritualist mediums who also communicated with
those on the other side.
    Christopher Partridge has traced notions of the astral in mid-twentieth-
century UFO-related religions back to Theosophy.35 He also sees numerous
similarities with New Age and Theosophy including ideas of “reincarnation,
chakras, past lives, future lives, psychic therapy, oneness with the Earth, chan-
nelling, astral travel and so on”.36 Also, “churches of magic” have retained
similar astral practices throughout the twentieth century. One example is
the Church of the Sun, which operated in the 1960s and 1970s. As Frederick
R. Lynch documents, the organization incorporated astral cosmologies and
travel as part of its doctrine.37 Similarly, during the same time period, a dif-
ferent church of magic, the Solar Lodge, incorporated various astral occult
practices into its organization.38 Lastly, Ordo Templi Orientis, still active today
with international headquarters in the United States, United Kingdom and
Australia, traces its origin, ideas, and practices back to a number of organi-
zations including esoteric Freemasonry and, through Crowley, the Golden
Dawn. Crowley incorporated astral travel into his magical curricula and this
is still promoted by the group.39 Thus it becomes evident quickly that the vari-
ous concepts and practices regarding the astral that were practised by the
Theosophical Society and the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn, found
their way into a wide spectrum of alternative religious practice throughout the
Western world. However, these practitioners did not just practise their eso-
teric religions in their communities. Beginning in the mid-1990s the Internet
became a central place for the dissemination of religious information, com-
munication and community. Indeed, the Internet became a central place for
all of these traditions to meet and communicate.

 33. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 260.
 34. Michael F. Brown, The Channeling Zone, 6.
 35. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 177.
 36. Ibid., 196.
 37. See Frederick R. Lynch, “‘Occult Establishment’ or ‘Deviant Religion’?”.
 38. Solar Lodge traces its origins through figures like Aleister Crowley and organizations like
     Ordo Templi Orientis. Little scholarship discusses the Solar Lodge except Starr, “Chaos
     from Order”. A former Solar Lodge member published an account of the group which, in
     part, discusses the group’s astral travel teachings and practices. See Frater Shiva, Inside
     Solar Lodge/Outside the Law.
 39. The website of the US branch of the Ordo Templi Orientis explicitly recommends Crowley’s
     Magick in Theory and Practice which contains extensive instructions as to the use of the
     astral. See OTO, “Library”.

                                                                                           169
john l . crow