Interestingly, now a vague concept of “soul” is invoked by the scientists to
avoid their transgressive operation. Subsequently, they can leave the issue
unresolved as “a philosophical question”.
    It would carry me too far into other topics if I were to follow this path here.
Instead, I want to drive my argument home. The examples of contemporary life
sciences and synthetic biology illustrate in a nutshell that the four dynamics of
discursive change that I explained in this chapter can be operative together
and in mutual dependency. These examples are not only clear evidence of sci-
entification (in more than one way); they also reveal how scientific knowledge
is aesthetically represented and communicated; and they take place in a pub-
lic sphere that includes political actors, scientists, and a large audience that is
interested in popularized forms of scientific claims. These truth claims by far
transgress the borders of scientific thinking in immanent and empirically test-
able models. They stand in the line of esoteric quests to unlock the ultimate
secrets of the cosmos and to reveal the hidden meaning of human history.
    In their quest, J. Craig Venter and Francis S. Collins have embarked on the
same journey as Stephen W. Hawking, the celebrated physicist, and an even
more successful author of popularized science. Hawking, too, transgresses
the borders of science and takes on the role of religious expert and esoteric
teacher:

      Ever since the dawn of civilization, people have not been content
      to see events as unconnected and inexplicable. They have craved
      an understanding of the underlying order in the world. Today we
      still yearn to know why we are here and where we have come from.
      Humanity’s deepest desire for knowledge is justification enough
      for our continuing quest. And our goal is nothing less then a com-
      plete description of the universe we live in.60

 59. Ibid.
 60. Hawking, A Brief History of Time, 15.


242
                                       discursive transfers and reconfigurations



With such a claim, this scientist–saviour naturally deserves the last word in an
essay on the place of the esoteric in contemporary culture: “A complete, con-
sistent, unified theory is only the first step: our goal is a complete understand-
ing of the events around us, and of our own existence”.61




 61. Ibid., 187.


                                                                              243
chapter 12

RADICAL POLITICS AND POLITICAL ESOTERICISM
THE ADAPTATION OF ESOTERIC DISCOURSE
WITHIN THE RADICAL RIGHT

Jacob Christiansen Senholt



What do esoteric phenomena such as Chaos Magick, runic symbolism,
Tantric yoga and the mythical Atlantis have to do with radical right-wing poli-
tics? Not a lot, one would think, but as will be demonstrated in this chapter,
the radical political right serves as an important example when talking about
esoteric transfers, that is, the impact of esoteric currents and their discourse
on “non-esoteric” social, cultural and ideological systems. There are numerous
historical and contemporary examples of connections and overlaps between
esoteric currents and right-wing political ideas. Beginning with the historical,
a prominent example is the politicization of esotericism with the rise of the
so-called völkisch movement in nineteenth-century Germany, emerging from
the Romantic nationalism of Johann Gottlieb Fichte and Johann Gottfried
von Herder. This movement combined nationalism, anti-liberalism, cultural
pessimism and racism into a coherent ideological system.1 In the early twen-
tieth century these ideas mixed with Theosophical2 notions and grew into
Ariosophy, a doctrine of Aryan racist and occult ideas promoted by Jörg Lanz
von Liebenfels, Guido von List and their followers.3 In the wake of Ariosophy,
numerous groups inspired by these ideas formed, from Theodor Fritsch’s
Germanenorden, Friedrich Marby’s Rune Yoga and Liebenfels’s Order of the
New Templars (Ordo Novi Templi), to the Thule Society, which sponsored
the ­burgeoning Nazi Party and included important party members such as
Rudolf Hess and Dietrich Eckart. This völkisch awakening culminated during
the Third Reich, although, quite ironically, most of these groups were banned

   1. Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism, 2. For a general overview of the völkisch
      movement and related currents see Stern, The Politics of Cultural Despair; Mosse, The
      Crisis of German Ideology.
   2. For a more detailed explanation of Theosophy in the tradition of Blavatsky see Godwin, The
      Theosophical Enlightenment; Bruce F. Campbell, Ancient Wisdom Revived.
   3. Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism, 227.


244
                                                radical politics and political esotericism



and their members imprisoned. The notable exception was Himmler’s own
personal coterie, where Karl Maria von Wiligut acted as a personal adviser, or
“Himmler’s Rasputin”, in matters of astrology and Ariosophy.4
    A second historical example of overlaps between esotericism and radical
politics is Traditionalism. Traditionalism, at times also referred to as “Integral
Traditionalism” or the “Traditionalist School”, is motivated by a religiously
based opposition to modern Western society and its paradigmatic values of
individualism, consumerism, and perpetual growth. It also upholds the idea
of perennialism, the esoteric notion of the existence of universal, transcend-
ent truths, which unite disparate religious traditions – an idea often found in
other esoteric currents.5 Key Traditionalist thinkers are René Guénon, Frithjof
Schuon and Ananda Coomaraswamy.6 More relevant for this article, however,
is the more politicized, radical and controversial Traditionalism of Italian eso-
tericist Julius Evola, who played a major role in conveying a radical political
Traditionalism to anti-modern intellectuals. Initially this was attempted dur-
ing the Fascist and Nazi regimes of Italy and Germany, with Evola forming ties
to both the Fascist Party and the SS. After World War II Evola became indir­
ectly and unwillingly involved as a right-wing ideologue in the “black terror”
of the Italian “Years of Lead” from the late 1960s to the early 1980s, where left-
and right-wing extremists were involved in numerous acts of terrorism against
both each other and the state.7 What makes Evola even more interesting when
talking about esoteric transfers is the fact that he was involved in both politi-
cal endeavours and various esoteric practices through his involvement with
the esoteric fraternity Gruppo di Ur, co-founded by Evola, Arthuro Reghini
and Giovanni Colazza in 1927. The group provided Evola with numerous eso-
teric notions, which were also reflected in his political ideology.8
    Going from the past to the present, it is apparent that the wide array of
historical examples of overlaps between esotericism and the radical right are
not unique, but instead part of a persistent trend which is still present in con-
temporary times.9 Taking a cue from Traditionalism, in particular the politi-
cized anti-modernism of Julius Evola, the radical right has adapted numerous


   4. Flowers & Moynihan, The Secret King; Goodrick-Clarke, The Occult Roots of Nazism, 177.
   5. Cf. Chapter 2 of this volume.
   6. Sedgwick, Against the Modern World.
   7. Evola’s post-war political endeavours are described in Hansen, “Introduction”; Drake,
      “Julius Evola and the Ideological Origins of the Radical Right in Contemporary Italy”, and
      the overall political situation and the “Years of Lead” in Ferraresi, Threats to Democracy;
      Merkl, Political Violence and Terror. Evola’s own post-war political works are primarily
      Evola, Orientamenti; Evola, Men among the Ruins.
   8. For more on Evola and his involvement with Gruppo di Ur see Hakl, “Die Magie bei Julius
      Evola und Ihre Philosophischen Voraussetzungen”; Evola, Path of Cinnabar, 88–95; Evola,
      Introduction to Magic.
   9. For a more detailed overview of these phenomena and how they interrelate see Dahl,
      Radikalare än Hitler?; Arvidsson, Aryan Idols.


                                                                                            245
jacob christiansen senholt