STOLEN LEGACY

Among the most important books in the Afrocentric paradigm is George
G. M. James’s (?–1954) Stolen Legacy (1954). Among critics, the book is usually
quoted as evidence for the low academic standards of Afrocentric studies. One
of the more infamous parts of the book deals with Alexander the Great sacking
the library of Alexandria, an event generally seen as historically impossible.17
What is of interest here, however, is not the factuality of James’s claims but
rather the history that he constructs and his use of esoteric sources. For James,
the “conspiracy against the black man” is not a modern phenomenon, but one
that dates back at least to Alexander the Great. Among other things, he claims
that Aristotle stole all his books from the library in Alexandria and later pub-
lished them under his own name. For example, Aristotle’s On the Soul was,
according to James, demonstrably plagiarized from the Egyptian Book of the
Dead, since they both deal with the topic of the soul in some form.18 In order
to find proof for his thesis James embraced ideas found in esoteric writings,
viewing Egypt as the centre of wisdom. This also led to further conspiratorial

 16. Ibid., 66–7 (emphasis original).
 17. Howe, Afrocentrism, 128.
 18. James, Stolen Legacy, 122–3.


                                                                              55
fredrik gregorius



ideas, such as the Masons being aware of the African origin of their teachings
but hiding them.
    James’s book needs to be understood in the context of his time. It was writ-
ten in the 1950s when the black civil rights movement was on the rise, but
with accompanying feelings among many that little actual change was taking
place. James’s work can thus be seen as one born out of frustration and dis-
illusionment. The perspective was no longer one of the influence of African
cultural elements on Europe, but one of outright theft of African culture by
Europeans. James provides a detailed description of what was stolen, and how.
In the search for a chain of evidence, he turned to esoteric doctrines and views
of Egypt as the centre of mysteries. For example, in the introduction of the
book he writes:

      The term Greek philosophy, to begin with is a misnomer, for there
      is no such philosophy in existence. The ancient Egyptians had
      developed a very complex religious system, called the Mysteries,
      which was also the first system of salvation. As such, it regarded
      the human body as a prison house of the soul, which could be lib-
      erated from its bodily impediments, through the disciplines of the
      Arts and Sciences, and advanced from the level of a mortal to that
      of a God. This was the notion of the summum bonum or greatest
      good, to which all men must aspire, and it also became the basis of
      all ethical concepts.19

Not only were the Egyptian mysteries the source of all Western philosophy
and ethics; James also insisted that the Egyptians had taught the mysteries in
secret orders:

      The Egyptian Mystery System was also a Secret Order, and mem-
      bership was gained by initiation and a pledge to secrecy. The teach-
      ing was graded and delivered orally to the Neophyte; and under
      these circumstances of secrecy, the Egyptians developed secret
      systems of writing and teaching, and forbade their Initiates from
      writing what they had learnt.20

Later, he went into more detail as to how the Egyptian mysteries operated and
how people were initiated into them. Most of this is standard material from
Masonic and Rosicrucian writings, and the British historian Stephen Howe
has claimed that Stolen Legacy is as “much a mystic–ritualistic, and more spe-
cifically Masonic, work as it is an Afrocentric one”.21 Still, the specific esoteric

 19. Ibid., 1.
 20. Ibid.
 21. Howe, Afrocentrism, 66.


56
                                                                 inventing africa



sources that James used are seldom discussed. To merely state that he is influ-
enced by Masonic writings does little to further our understanding. Of more
interest is what sort of Masonic ideas and writings were used. Despite the fact
that Masonry had such an impact on the black community, there are scant
indications as to James himself being a Mason. Rather, his sources seem to
have been published works, often Theosophical interpretations of Masonry.
Howe does, however, argue that based on James’s own writings, we can infer
that he was a Freemason who was “strongly influenced by the more esoteric
aspects of Masonic lore”.22 While it is hardly improbable that James was a
Mason, his works do not provide clear evidence for such statements. If any-
thing, relying on the most quoted works, it would seem more likely that he
was either a member of a Theosophical group or a Rosicrucian order. James
refers, for example, to AMORC’s magazine, Rosicrucian Digest.23
   One of James’s most quoted sources is a Theosophically inspired work,
Charles H. Vail’s The Ancient Mysteries and Modern Masonry from 1909.
Its influence is most notable when it comes to the contents of the Egyptian
mysteries and their history, and James sometimes quotes whole pages from
Vail, not always with proper reference. Vail’s interpretation of the origin of
the mysteries differs somewhat from James’s, as the former is more clearly
based on Helena Blavatsky’s The Secret Doctrine (1888). Vail was a Christian
Universalist clergyman and a dedicated socialist, whose work before The
Ancient Mysteries included titles such as Principles of Scientific Socialism,
The Industrial Evolution, Mission of the Working Class and Socialism and the
Negro Problem. In The Ancient Mysteries, however, few of his political ideas
are present. According to Vail, the mysteries were first established in Atlantis,
but after the fall of the civilization they survived in Egypt and Chaldea, where
the mysteries had been established before Atlantis sank.24 Considering James’s
strong reliance on Vail, and the latter’s emphasis on Masonry, it is no surprise
that the Egyptian mysteries get a Masonic flair in James’s writings as well.
Among other things, the mystery schools are presented as being organized in
lodges, and Egypt is regarded as the home of the Grand Lodge.25
   A central theme in James’s writing is that nothing new was invented after
the Egyptians, or rather that the “original version” of the mysteries was pure
while later developments represented decline. The Greek versions were infer­
ior to the Egyptian as they merely imitated the original form. One of the few
Greeks that get any real recognition is Socrates, who was considered to be an
initiate of the mysteries, and also a Mason.26
   For James, philosophy is static and unchanging, and the role of the phil­
osopher is thus to understand the mysteries, not to create new theories.

 22.   Ibid., 66.
 23.   James, Stolen Legacy, 179.
 24.   Vail, The Ancient Mysteries and Modern Masonry, 14–16.
 25.   James, Stolen Legacy, 31–2.
 26.   Ibid., 89.

                                                                              57
fredrik gregorius



James’s aim is not merely to provide a mystical treatise on how to achieve eso-
teric goals, but rather to demonstrate how this new knowledge will serve the
improvement of people of African descent in America and elsewhere. The
final chapter of the book, “Social reformation through the New Philosophy of
African Redemption”, begins like this:

        Now that it has been shown that philosophy, and the arts and
        sciences were bequeathed to civilization by the people of North
        Africa and not by the people of Greece; the pendulum of praise
        and honour is due to shift from the people of Greece to the people
        of the African continent who are the rightful heirs of such praise
        and honour. This is going to mean a tremendous change in world
        opinion, and attitude, for all people and races who accept the new
        philosophy of African redemption, i.e. the truth that the Greeks
        were not the authors of Greek philosophy; but the people of North
        Africa; would change their opinion from one of disrespect to one
        of respect for the Black people throughout the world and treat
        them accordingly. It is also going to mean a most important change
        in the mentality of the Black people: a change from an inferior-
        ity complex, to the realization and consciousness of their equality
        with all the other great peoples of the world, who have built great
        civilizations. With this change in the mentality of the Black and
        White people, great changes are also expected in their respective
        attitudes towards each other, and in society as a whole.27