Ecology, just as esotericism, is a “hotly debated discursive field”, in which many
actors struggle to enforce their particular interpretation. In short, instead of
a singular Deep Ecology we have a great number of competing, and at times
contradicting, Deep Ecologies. Some of these are tied to the esoteric field of
discourse more closely than others, but most engage with it in some ways
due to polemics on both sides. Greer provides a detailed history of both the
term and the “field”, including the complexities and polemics it contains, iden-
tifying key actors. Some of these, such as “New Age” spokespersons Fritjof
Capra and Ken Wilber, Joanna Macy and John Seed’s Council of All Beings,
and the Wiccan Gus diZerega, are intimately connected to the esoteric milieu.
Furthermore, references to James Lovelock’s Gaia hypothesis and the physics
of David Bohm, which are also often referenced in contemporary esotericism,
are commonplace. A particularly interesting example is George Sessions, who
while being hostile to notions of a connection between Deep Ecology and
“New Age” still draws on Aldous Huxley’s The Perennial Philosophy and con-
ceives of the former as “a contemporary manifestation of a primordial meta-
physic”. Despite these affinities, Greer maintains that equating the two fields,
or firmly placing one within the other, would be erroneous. Instead, a more
sound approach is to regard Deep Ecology and the esoteric as two distinct
fields of discourse that sometimes converge.
    Together, the chapters in this third section point to interesting future ave-
nues to which reconceptualizing notions of the esoteric, religious, and secular
can take us. Furthermore, they demonstrate the utility that the study of the
esoteric can have for religious studies more broadly, and beyond, by breaking
up the borders between the scientific, political, cultural and religious.


Leaving the margins

Whereas the chapters in Part III deal with esoteric transfers by discussing
more marginal phenomena, the final part approaches partly the same theme
by looking at something of a “de-marginalization” or “mainstreaming” of the
esoteric. This undeviating of the deviant and ­mainstreaming of the alternative
takes place in several different spheres and ways. As Christopher Partridge
has noted, when considering the immense popularity of esoteric ideas, “alter-
native” may not be the most suitable term to describe it.28 Furthermore, as
Marion Bowman and Steven Sutcliffe note; “any talk of ‘alternative’ spirituality
begs the question of normativity in ­contemporary religion”.29 This final section
of the volume aims to demonstrate that the presence of the esoteric needs to
be addressed in these discussions.

 28. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 85; see also Partridge’s Chapter 6 in the
     present volume. Cf. Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, xi.
 29. Sutcliffe & Bowman, “Introduction”, 10–11.


                                                                                              17
egil asprem and kennet granholm



   In looking at “The Secular, the Post-Secular and the Esoteric in the Public
Sphere”, Kennet Granholm (Chapter 15) examines processes by which the eso-
teric is leaving both academic and cultural margins. The concept of the post-
secular has in recent years become central to sociological theorizing about
religion in modern societies. Granholm discusses and evaluates at length the
meaning and importance of this concept, its relation to the secularization
paradigm and its (many) theories, as well as to the place of the esoteric in
contemporary culture. Taking a discursive approach to secularization theory,
Granholm suggests that the notion of secularization “can be regarded a post-
Enlightenment hegemonic discourse – informed by the ideology of secular-
ism” – which has helped to create the situation that it tries to describe. In
relation to this understanding, he argues that the “post-secular” suggests not a
straightforward “return of religion”, but rather an awareness of the continued
relevance of religion in secular societies, as well as changing perceptions of
what actually counts as religion, what functions it may have, and where it is
located. Precisely with regard to these relocations and changing perceptions,
as well as functions, of religion, Granholm finds that the place of the eso-
teric is also changing. As explored in some earlier contributions as well, the
mediatization of the esoteric becomes particularly important as new forms
of media are rapidly developed, and new uses and patterns of consumption of
culture follow it. Granholm focuses on the increasing presence of the esoteric
in popular culture. Analysing esoteric elements of the science fiction franchise
Stargate, and the film Avatar (at the time of writing, the top-grossing movie
of all time), also considering their reception, context and spread, Granholm
finds there is a strong case to be made that “the esoteric has entered the
mainstream, and that esoteric notions resonate with large numbers of con-
temporary Westerners (and beyond)”. To fully appreciate this and other con-
sequences of the post-secular condition on the esoteric might require scholars
in the field to reconsider and extend their theoretical presuppositions and
choice of methodology.
   While paranormal beliefs are often regarded a matter for uneducated peo-
ple, Egil Asprem shows in Chapter 16 that some of these are more properly
characterized as the “Psychic Enchantments of the Educated Classes”. Asprem
demonstrates by way of statistical data that some paranormal beliefs are actu-
ally more common among those with high education, including in the natural
sciences. Even the influential “new atheist” ­spokesperson Sam Harris is seen
to entertain an ambiguity towards “psychic ­phenomena”, suggesting that his
opposition to religion rests on a very restricted understanding of that term.
What is the reason for these initially surprising positive correlations between
paranormal belief, high education and even claims to irreligion? Asprem seeks
the answer in the emergence of modern parapsychology in the 1930s, which
he links to the “intersection of two parallel processes”: the disenchantment of
esoteric discourse, and attempts to re-enchant science. As a prospective sci-
entific discipline, parapsychology provided a means of “scientific sanitization”

18
                                                                   introduction



of certain occult beliefs, making them more acceptable to the educated public.
The invention of new technical nomenclature to cover a number of “occult
abilities” was important in this respect, even giving rise to the names of some
paranormal phenomena which show up significantly in polls of beliefs: “telep-
athy” and “extra-sensory perception”. Furthermore, Asprem shows how the
presence of parapsychological beliefs in academia cannot be seen solely as an
“incursion from the outside”; it is rather the result of developments occurring
within academia itself, with relation to a broader esoteric, occultural milieu.
While questioning the notion that science has enforced a “disenchantment of
the world”, this simultaneously suggests that occulture, which is commonly
seen as spreading on a “folk” or “popular” level, has important nerve centres
inside academic (presumptively secular) “elite” culture as well.
   The much neglected subject of children and concepts of childhood in eso-
teric discourse is the focus of Daniel Kline’s Chapter 17, on “The New Kids”.
In the wake of the “New Age movement”, a peculiar discourse on gifted
Wunderkinder with special needs and psychic powers emerged: the “Indigo
children”. The notion of Indigo children can be traced to the self-proclaimed
“synesthete” Nancy Ann Tappe. In Understanding Your Life Thru Color
(1986), Tappe invented a typology of personality traits corresponding to col-
ours which, it was claimed, could be clairvoyantly seen in peoples’ auras. She
observed that children with previously unknown indigo auras had suddenly
started to appear, “indicative of ‘a new breed of children’ whose ‘process is to
show us tomorrow’”. Focusing on the Indigo Children (with mention of the
“Crystalline Children”, “Star Kids”, “Earth Angels” and other later additions to
this evolving discourse), Kline traces connections between modern esoteric
thought and the history of childhood. The increased politicization of children
and the commercialization of “New Age” discourse together appear as par-
ticularly important for understanding the discourse on Indigo Children. As
the Indigos are usually considered a subset of the generation born in the late
1970s or later, Kline considers the notion that the Indigo discourse is “a mani-
festation of the failures of the ‘baby boomer’ countercultural generation of the
1960s and 1970s”, who failed to manifest their ideological aspirations and have
since projected “their hopes for saving the world upon their children”. At the
same time, the category of the Indigos has served a function of sacralizing
“problem children” – particularly during the increase of attention deficit with
hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) and attention deficit disorder (ADD) diag-
noses, but also with reference to diagnoses such as autism. Getting connected
to the commercial aspects of contemporary “spiritual” and “alternative” cul-
ture, the Indigo counter-diagnosis has given rise to a host of special day-care
offers, training programmes, toys and games, designed to facilitate these “mis-
understood” children of presumptively messianic significance.
   In Chapter 18, by drawing on empirical, localized field research on “A
Small-Town Health Centre in Sweden”, Liselotte Frisk examines the useful-
ness of conceptualizations of the esoteric. Frisk pursues three main arguments

                                                                             19
egil asprem and kennet granholm