in traditional yoga, for example in the kind of numerology expressed by the
habit of repeating a yogic body movement a certain number of times. Mudras,
a group of physical practices with symbolic meaning, could traditionally be
seen as linked to the planets, which also illustrates a doctrine of correspond-
ences. However, although correspondences might be present in traditional
yoga, Hansson says that it is not at all prominent in the life yoga that she prac-
tises. In her yoga classes she hardly uses them at all. The second component,
“living nature”, is, however, important both in traditional yoga and in life yoga.
Hansson says that she considers the world to be permeated by a spiritual force,
and that yoga is a way to absorb prana: life force, or higher intelligence. As
to imagination and mediations, Hansson recognizes visualization and man-
tra chanting as ways to contact one’s own higher self or spiritual guide. The
experience of transmutation, she says, is certainly the goal of yoga, to experi-
ence the contact with the higher self, intuition or enlightenment. But Hansson
wants to emphasize that this is only one part of the goal. We are also humans
living in the ordinary world, with the need to see and understand our fears
and patterns connected to this world. Furthermore, Hansson believes that dif-
ferent religious traditions have the same essence, confirming what Faivre calls
the “praxis of concordance”, or the tendency to establish common denomina-
tors between different or all traditions (e.g. assuming the existence of a philos-
ophia perennis). There are, however, no transmissions from master to disciple
in life yoga, and no initiations.59 Still, Hansson considers “keeping the energy
in the class” to be her task as a teacher, as the function of the yoga teacher is
to be an open channel through which higher intelligence can flow to the yoga
students.60 Furthermore, in terms of Stark and Bainbridge’s model of the client
cult, one might theorize that consultant–client relations may in some cases be
the contemporary counterpart of master–disciple relations. This sociological
difference correlates with late modern implications of buying and selling con-
sultation services, an increased therapeutic orientation and partial commit-
ment, while the personal relationship remains very central and retains some
elements of spiritual transmission, albeit in new forms.


DISCUSSION

Below I will first discuss the activities at Hälsogränden as a product of the
dynamics of religious change, focusing on different ways to describe and inter-
pret contemporary spirituality. Next, I will discuss the concept of mainstream/


     Faivre as these concepts seem arbitrarily chosen and may fit in other contexts as well. My
     motivation to ask these questions was to test these concepts in a cultural context different
     from that of Renaissance Europe.
 59. As is well known, however, there are initiations in many other yogic traditions.
 60. Interview by author, Hedemora, Sweden, 11 November 2009.


                                                                                            383
liselotte frisk



established religion, the role it occupies in the different theories of Western
esotericism and theories of religious change, and the relevance for the con-
temporary situation. After that, individual experience and emotion is dis-
cussed, in relation to contemporary spirituality and the selected perspectives
that have been introduced. Finally, Faivre’s six criteria are discussed in relation
to the main activity at Hälsogränden: life yoga.


Hälsogränden as a product of the dynamics of religious change

Centres like Hälsogränden have become common in Sweden during the first
decade of the twenty-first century. During our research in Dalarna, we have
come across several such places, typically situated in small towns, being oper-
ated cooperatively by women, focusing on health and spirituality, and offer-
ing different kinds of activities, depending on the momentary orientations of
the producers. Structurally, small businesses like this have been economically
encouraged by the employment office in Sweden, as a way of getting people
out of unemployment, which may also be one reason for the growth of such
places.
    What are the historical backgrounds of the activities at Hälsogränden, and
how could these activities be described from the perspective of dynamics of
religious change? The first activity, life yoga, has a background in Indian cul-
ture, but has been locally adapted and changed according to Swedish circum-
stances by the founder Tomas Frankell. The yoga teacher Anette Hansson is
also active as a stress therapist, which is an innovative title with no support
in mainstream society through acknowledged educational programmes, for
example, or certified titles.
    Mindfulness, which is one of the activities of the second therapist at
Hälsogränden, also has a non-Western background. Originating as a Buddhist
practice, mindfulness has during the last few years accumulated more psycho-
logical connotations in Western culture, becoming part of cognitive–behav-
ioural therapy.61 Rosen therapy, essential movement and massage originate in
the American human potential movement of the 1960s, with roots in human-
istic psychology.62 Important characteristics in the human potential move-
ment, most of which are also prominent in Rosen therapy, essential movement,
and massage, are the focus on inner human potential and on expressing emo-
tions through body therapies, a focus on the here and now, or group therapy.
A certain syncretism aiming at bridging the boundaries between East–West,


 61. Frisk, “The Human Potential Movement”. For more information about the historical condi-
     tions that made an increasing assimilation of Buddhist ideas into Western psychology and
     psychotherapy possible, see Dryden & Still, “Historical Aspects of Mindfulness”.
 62. Classical massage, as this therapist advertises, also originates in the Swedish health move-
     ment in the twentieth century.


384
                                                 a small - town health centre in sweden



inner–outer and science–religion is also characteristic.63 Concerning hair
therapy, it is a bit more difficult to trace the historical roots, as it uses ele-
ments from a variety of sources. There is a degree of creativity or innovation,
combined with possibly Theosophical elements (Theosophy in turn being sub-
ject to early inspiration from Indian religions) as the use of concepts such as
“aura” and “chakra” suggests. Reiki healing originates in Japan, but is rather
innovative also in Japanese culture, while different kinds of healing have older
roots in Japanese religions. The hairdressing team also refers to acupuncture,
originating in China, where it is a well-established healing system. However,
the concrete connection to acupuncture in hair therapy remains quite unclear.
The mixture of elements from different sources, both imported and innova-
tive, is characteristic of hair therapy, and a procedure that in itself is a form of
innovation through synthesis.
   Several of the authors discussed in previous sections aim to say some-
thing about the dynamics of religious change. Hanegraaff describes New Age
as being in a historical continuity with Western esotericism, reinterpreted
through the five developmental traits discussed earlier. His approach implies
that cultural and structural changes in society are important factors influen­
cing religious change. Hanegraaff also implies that the New Age movement
emphasizes “gnosis”, which is rejected as unacceptable from the more conven-
tional perspectives of “faith” and “reason”, and thus connected with a reservoir
of ideas regarded incompatible with the dominant trends of Western culture.
Thus a turn towards gnosis – or the individual experience of self or God – has,
in the view of Hanegraaff, been an important feature in the dynamics of reli-
gious change.
   Concerning the therapies at Hälsogränden, few of them have historical
roots in what we could call historical or geographical esotericism. We find
no astrology, no alchemy, no initiatory orders and no magic (in the esoteric
sense) in the activities of Hälsogränden. Only the hairdressing company, using
concepts originating in the Theosophical tradition, could be seen as having
some kind of direct connection to historical esotericism. The other activities
at Hälsogränden could rather be said to have roots in the human potential
movement, psychology and Eastern traditions. The only way to relate these
phenomena to Western esotericism in a historical sense would be in terms
of the reinterpretation in the modern context that Hanegraaff has suggested,
and in a radical way. The question then arises of whether it is fruitful to use
the label “Western esotericism” for this contemporary environment (and, if so,
why). The historical roots of the specific orientations and practices lie mainly
elsewhere. Regarding contemporary influences on the New Age environment,
Hanegraaff is precisely to the point in formulating the five developmental
traits discussed previously. However, I would suggest reconsidering the role


 63. See also Walter Truett Anderson, The Upstart Spring.


                                                                                   385
liselotte frisk