73. See Partridge, Dub in Babylon; Partridge, “King Tubby Meets the Upsetter”.
 74. See Keenan, “Childhood’s End”. On Tibet and Current 93, see Fava, “When Rome Falls,
     Falls the World”; Moliné, “Road to Salvation”.
 75. On The Process Church of the Final Judgment, see Bainbridge, Satan’s Power; Wyllie, Love,
     Sex, Fear, Death.
 76. See P-Orridge, “The Process is the Product”.
 77. Keyworth, “Occultism and the Contemporary Vampire Subculture”; Keyworth, “The Socio-
     Religious Beliefs and Nature of the Contemporary Vampire Subculture”; Laycock, Vampires
     Today; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 230–38.
 78. See Partridge, UFO Religions; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 165–206;
     Lewis, Encyclopedic Sourcebook of UFO Religions.
 79. See Cowan, Cyberhenge; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 135–64.



130
                                                             occulture is ordinary



   The idea of a “psychic television” is, again, significant. Although highly criti-
cal of television as a tool of mind control and mass indoctrination, it might
also, as indicated above, be used by an esoterrorist as a form of magick to
combat “Control” – “a modern alchemical weapon”:

      [Psychic TV] are attempting to knit together thee fine lines ov sha-
      manic initiation and voodoo invokation allegorically coded into
      western X-tian myth. TV itself becoums thee ceremony, thee lan-
      guage ov thee tribe. It becoums apparent that, cloaked in spurious
      messianic trivia, are ancient tantric rituals involving small death,
      limbo and resurrection that have now been literalised and usurped
      by a base language system named religion. Just as religion cloaks
      ancient knowledge and techniques, so Television cloaks its power
      to invoke thee lowest coumon denominator ov revelation … We
      intend to reinstate thee ability ov TV to empower and entrance
      thee viewer. To remove thee window and passibity, and re-enter
      thee world ov dreams beyond. We believe TV is a Modern alchem-
      ical weapon that can have a positive and cumulative effect upon
      Intuition.80

Understanding TOPY to be the natural successor to the early Ordo Templi
Orientis (OTO), particularly under Crowley’s leadership, it was established to
be “a secret society created as an access point into the world of magick”.81 As
Jason Louv comments in P-Orridge’s Thee Psychick Bible:

      Neither the OTO nor TOPY were teaching orders, existing instead
      to foster socialization around occult ideas – halfway points for
      those interested in the hidden undercurrents of reality, training
      wheels that, when eventually discarded, would lead the individual
      either towards more abstruse orders of robed ritualists or, prefer-
      ably, onto their own two feet and their own personal apotheosis.82

Concerning “occulture” per se, while it is not widely used in P-Orridge’s writ-
ings and never fully theorized, it is important, particularly to TOPY. As Carl
Abrahamsson writes in his Foreword to Thee Psychick Bible:

      Probably no word does better justice to the TOPY phenomenon
      than “Occulture.” Meshing “Occult” with “Culture,” there’s also


 80. P-Orridge, Esoterrorist, 18–19.
 81. Louv, in P-Orridge, Thee Psychick Bible, 25.
 82. Ibid., 25.



                                                                                131
christopher partridge



      a prefixed trace of “Occident” if you will. The defined concept as
      such was integrated in the inter-TOPY-“lingo” in the late 80s, and
      then grew to become a readily accepted general term for anything
      cultural yet decidedly occult/spiritual. As a more or less unnamed
      concept, Occulture had already been active in TOPY since day one.
      The field of research was never ever occultism per se or culture per
      se, but always consisted of interchangeability where eventually the
      clear-cut borders were gently erased. Books, pamphlets, newslet-
      ters, film and video screenings, record and cassette releases and
      other manifestations could certainly contain more or less blatant
      esoteric form or content, but it was in no way a prerequisite. The
      literal meaning of “occult” (as in “hidden”) was given a wider per-
      spective than the merely “magical” one.83

This, then, is the original context within which the term “occulture” emerged.
Although there is much about P-Orridge’s work with which one might take
issue, such as its articulation of oppression, suffering and abuse, occasion-
ally defended with what appears to be a veneer of unreflective or uncaring
faux morality,84 for several reasons “occulture” has proved to be a pregnant
and useful term, as we have seen. Moreover, key aspects of occult culture, as
understood by P-Orridge and TOPY, are useful in understanding occulture
per se, as well as being themselves good examples of the novel ways in which
esotericism is evolving in late modernity.


CONCLUDING COMMENTS

The aim of this chapter has been to develop further the theory of occulture
that I posited some years ago. In order to articulate the important distinc-
tion between occulture and occult culture, this has been done with reference
to Campbell’s theory of the cultic milieu, the esoteric ideas of P-Orridge and
TOPY, and Williams’s theory of culture as ordinary. Occulture is not occult
culture, in the sense that it is not a milieu of the esoteric and the hidden
(although it certainly includes that which is esoteric and hidden); nor is it a
site of the exotic and the forbidden (although it certainly includes the exotic
and the forbidden). Rather, like culture – which, of course, it is – it is ordinary
and everyday. As such, occulture, as culture, is an explanans for Western re-
enchantment rather than jargon for occult culture. Indeed, it is the reason why
occult culture per se often seems, at some level, plausible and attractive to so
many people.


 83. Abrahamson, in P-Orridge, Thee Psychick Bible, 11.
 84. Stubbs, “Clearing the Wreckage”; Reynolds, Rip It Up, 224–44.


132
                                                            occulture is ordinary



   Not only is there good evidence for occulture, but there is evidence that it is
both generational to some extent and that popular culture is key to its efficacy.
Indeed, although there are obviously exceptions and confounding variables,
occulture’s current persuasive power has a generational specificity. Again, this
is perhaps saying little more than occulture moves with the times; occulture is
ordinary; occulture is in accord with the zeitgeist. However, because occulture
is ordinary, as we have seen with P-Orridge and TOPY, largely by means of
popular culture and new media, individuals and small groups are able to have
a disproportionate impact on the zeitgeist. Again, because occulture is ordi-
nary, and because, therefore, occult culture has a certain cogency and plau-
sibility, subversive ripples caused by minority esoteric ideas can travel a long
way in society. This, of course, makes esoterrorism and theories of occultural
propaganda a particularly rich area for future research.
   Finally, we have seen that P-Orridge, who coined the term “occulture”, is
himself an interesting occultural case study. His use of the cut-up method,
his founding of TOPY as an occultural offshoot of the esoteric outfit Psychic
TV (through which he sought to disseminate politically subversive and occult
ideas), his occultural eclecticism, his related understanding of popular music
as propaganda and his esoterrorist agenda, all suggest avenues of thought that
are helpful to the construction of a more developed theory of occulture.




                                                                              133
chapter 7

FROM BOOK TO BIT
ENACTING SATANISM ONLINE

Jesper Aagaard Petersen




Although overshadowed by pornography and file sharing, religion is a popu-
lar topic online, and increasingly so.1 As a consequence, the previously hard-
to-get and difficult-to-see has blossomed as the virtual environment supports
the easy transmission, archiving and recontextualization of texts and imagery.
Even if the adoption of new technologies has not been even, all kinds of esoter-
icism, occultism and alternative religiosity previously relegated to the margins
as fringe pursuits are now exhibited and easily found alongside established
offline religions through hyperlinks and search engines. With this propagation
of information we lose a sense of relative comprehension, but we gain some-
thing else. In her research, Annette Markham has proposed two important
ways in which the Internet and related computer-mediated communication
technologies are viewed and used: as a tool for communication and as a virtual
social space.2 Extending that notion and drawing on examples from contem-
porary religious Satanism, this chapter provides a discussion of new contexts
for source material as well as new types of material on the Internet, both of
which are highly relevant in the study of modern esotericism.
    As a context, the new virtual space magnifies something that has been very
difficult to see, let alone study, namely the fluid relations between free-floating
material and the audiences and practitioners using it. The cacophony of online
meaning-making actually supports established sociological models of occult
affiliations and “rejected knowledge” as ­transmitted through a cultic milieu
between seekers, originally formulated by Colin Campbell in the early 1970s.3

   1. See Højsgaard & Warburg, “Introduction”, 2–3.
   2. Cf. Markham, “The Internet as a Research Context”, 360–63. Markham includes a third
      view: Internet as a “way of being” which extends the second category of Internet as “place”
      through internalization.
   3. Colin Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and Secularization”. For elaborations with
      relevance to the study of modern esotericism see e.g. Barkun, A Culture of Conspiracy;



134
                                                                              from book to bit