or facilitate a state of ε’ νθουσιασμός (“enthusiasm”), such as specific breathing
techniques, rhythmic drumming, ritual prayer and incantations, meditation,
and so on. This was already the case in antiquity, and remains so today. It will
therefore be useful to distinguish between entheogenic religion in a narrow
and in a wide sense: with respect to the wider category, one could think of
such cases as the ritual practices known as “theurgy”, described for instance
by the third/fourth-century neoplatonic philosopher Iamblichus,3 the compli-
cated techniques known as “ecstatic kabbalah”, developed by the Jewish mystic
Abraham Abulafia in the thirteenth century,4 or even the experience of being
“filled by the Holy Spirit” in contemporary Pentecostalism. The historical evi-
dence in Western culture for entheogenic religion in a narrow sense (that is,
involving the use of psychoactive substances) is a contentious issue to say
the least, and discussing it seriously would require a book-length treatment;
but in order to establish that we are not pursuing a chimaera it suffices, for
now, to point out that the existence of such kinds of religion in indigenous
cultures is well documented, particularly in the Latin American context.5 The
present chapter will focus exclusively on one particular trend of contemporary
entheogenic religion – in a narrow sense – which may be defined as a form of
Western esotericism and has not yet received the attention it deserves.


ENTHEOGENS AND RELIGION: CONCEPTUAL PITFALLS AND PREJUDICES

That entheogens might have a legitimate place in religion at all is controver-
sial among scholars, but for reasons that have less to do with factual evidence
than with certain ingrained prejudices rooted in Western intellectual culture.
First, on the crypto-Protestant assumption that “religion” implies an attitude
in which human beings are dependent on the divine initiative to receive grace
or salvation, the use of entheogens is bound to suggest a “magical” and there-
fore not “truly religious” attitude in which human beings themselves dare to
take the initiative and claim to have the key of access to divinity. Such a dis-
tinction (in which the former option is coded positively and the latter nega-
tively) makes intuitive sense to us because modern intellectual culture since
the Enlightenment has internalized specific Protestant assumptions to an
extent where they appear wholly natural and obvious: in Clifford Geertz’s


   3. See e.g. Shaw, “Theurgy”; Luck, “Theurgy and Forms of Worship”. Luck suggests that
      Neoplatonic theurgy may in fact have been entheogenic religion in the narrow sense as
      well, but the evidence does not allow us to establish this as a fact.
   4. Scholem, Major Trends in Jewish Mysticism, 146–55; Idel, Mystical Experience in Abraham
      Abulafia, 13–52.
   5. See for example the ritual use of ayahuasca (aka yage, hoasca, daime) in a variety of Latin
      American religions (Labate & Jungaberle, The Internationalization of Ayahuasca), or peyote
      religion in the USA.


                                                                                            393
wouter j . hanegraaff



famous formulation, the dominant symbolic system clothes them with such
an “aura of factuality” that the “moods and motivations” connected to them
seem “uniquely realistic”.6 These assumptions are, however, culture-specific
and highly problematic. The underlying opposition of “religion” versus “magic”
(along with “science”) as reified universals has been thoroughly deconstructed,
in recent decades, as artificial and ethnocentric to the core: it depends on nor-
mative modernist ideologies and implicit hegemonic claims of Western supe-
riority that are rooted in heresiological, missionary and colonialist mentalities
but cannot claim universal or even scholarly validity. Ultimately based upon
the theological battle against “paganism”, the “magic versus religion” assump-
tion, including its “manipulative” versus “receptive” connotations, is a distort-
ing mirror that fails to account for the complexity of beliefs and practices on
both sides of the conceptual divide.7
    A second cause of controversy has to do with certain idealist frameworks
or assumptions that seem so natural to Western scholars that they are seldom
reflected upon. Religion is generally supposed to be about spiritual realities,
not material ones, and therefore the claim that modifying brain activity by
chemical means might be a religious pursuit seems counterintuitive. It comes
across as a purely technical and quasi-materialist trick that cheats practition-
ers into believing they are having a “genuine” religious experience. However,
such objections are extremely problematic. First, they wrongly assume that
there are scholarly procedures for distinguishing genuine from fake religion.
Second, they ignore the fact that any activity associated with mind or spirit
is inseparable from neurological activity and brain chemistry. In our experi-
ence as human beings we know of no such thing as “pure” spiritual activity
(or, for that matter, any other mental activity) unconnected with the body and
the brain: if it did exist, we would be incapable of experiencing its effects!8
Since all forms of experience, including “experiences deemed religious”,9 are
bodily phenomena by definition, it is arbitrary to exclude entheogenic religion
merely because of the particular method it uses to influence the brain.
    A final cause of controversy is, of course, the well-known rhetoric employed
in the “war on drugs” since the end of the 1960s. Here the polemical use of
reified universal categories is once again decisive: rather than carefully dif-
ferentiating between the enormous variety of psychoactive substances and
their effects, the monolithic category of “drugs” suggests that all of them are


   6. Geertz, “Religion as a Cultural System”.
   7. See detailed discussion in Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 3, with special
      reference to Styers, Making Magic.
   8. Some critics might point to out-of-body experiences as counter-evidence, but any account
      of such experiences is communicated to us after the fact, that is, after the subject has pur-
      portedly “returned” to his or her body. Therefore all we have is memories in the minds of
      embodied persons, indirectly communicated to us in the form of verbal accounts.
   9. Taves, Religious Experience Reconsidered, 8–9 and passim.


394
                                                                      entheogenic esotericism



­ angerous and addictive. Although the medical and pharmacological evidence
d
does not support this assumption, politics and the media have been singularly
successful in promoting the reified category; and as a result, the notion that
entheogens might have a normal and legitimate function in some religious
contexts is bound to sound bizarre to the general public. Scholars who insist
on differentiating between different kinds of “drugs”, pointing out that some of
them are harmless and might even be beneficial,10 therefore find themselves
in a defensive position by default: it is always easy for critics to suggest that
their scholarly arguments are just a front for some personal agenda of pro-­
psychedelic apologetics.
   The bottom line is that, for all these reasons, the very notion of entheogenic
religion as a category in scholarly research finds itself at a strategic disadvan-
tage from the outset. It is simply very difficult for us to look at the relevant reli-
gious beliefs and practices from a neutral and non-judgemental point of view,
for in the very act of being observed – that is, even prior to any conscious
attempt on our part to apply any theoretical perspective – they already appear
to us pre-categorized in the terms of our own cultural conditioning. Almost
inevitably, they are perceived as pertaining to a negative “waste-basket cat-
egory” of otherness associated with a strange assortment of “magical”, “pagan”,
“superstitious” or “irrational” beliefs; and as such, they are automatically seen
as different from “genuine” or “serious” forms of religion. The “drugs” category
further causes them to be associated with hedonistic, manipulative, irrespon-
sible, or downright criminal attitudes, so that claims of religious legitimacy are
weakened even further.
   In this chapter an attempt will nevertheless be made to treat entheogenic
esotericism as just another form of contemporary religion that requires our
serious attention. A first reason for doing so is strictly empirical: if it is true
that entheogenic esotericism happens to exist as a significant development
in post-World War II religion and in contemporary society, then it is simply
our business as scholars to investigate it. A second reason is more theoretical
in nature: both the “esoteric” and the “entheogenic” dimension of this topic
challenges some of our most deeply ingrained assumptions about religion and
rationality, and studying their combination may therefore be particularly help-
ful in making us aware of our blind spots as intellectuals and scholars.


 10. See for example the clinical research presented in the special issue “Ayahuasca Use in
     Cross-Cultural Perspective”, Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 37.2 (2005), edited by Marlene
     Dobkin de Rios and Charles S. Grob. Obviously, and confusingly, the “harmless or even
     beneficial” category is often referred to by the same term “drugs” (as in “prescription
     drugs”). That substances such as ayahuasca could be understood as “drugs” in such a sense
     is widely experienced as counterintuitive because of its hallucinogenic properties (associ-
     ated with the recreational or hedonistic practice of “tripping”); but that such properties are
     incompatible with beneficial medical or psychiatric effects is an a priori assumption rather
     than an established fact.


                                                                                              395
wouter j . hanegraaff



ENTHEOGENS AND THE NEW AGE

The wider context in which entheogenic esotericism has appeared is usually
referred to as the New Age. In my 1996 study New Age Religion and Western
Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought, I wrote the following: