science majors are seldom exposed to that sort of course, and
      spend most of their initial scientific education in large classrooms
      where a professor whom they can barely see from across a large
      lecture hall inundates them with a flood of disconnected facts that
      they are supposed to remember in order to pass the test.28

In short, could it be that the amount of science education says little about crit-
ical thinking skills, and that one should expect this ability rather than knowl-
edge of “facts” to be the antidote of paranormal belief?
   This is another empirical matter, but one that Pigliucci did not actually test.
Sociologist Erich Goode, however, has designed and conducted some prelimi-
nary trials to check precisely this kind of correlation. Making the now famil-
iar distinction between paranormal phenomena with a “religious lineage” and
those with no such clear connection, Goode tested the correlation of belief in
each category with science literacy (i.e. knowledge of “facts”), but also with
proneness to use intuitive but rationally invalid cognitive heuristics, versus
the use of scientifically valid reasoning.29 Consistent with the earlier studies,
believers in phenomena clearly embedded in religious history were likely to
know less about science, and were also more prone to cognitive biases and
invalid heuristics. In other words, “religious paranormal belief ” corresponded
with scientific illiteracy, and a poor understanding of how science (ideally)
works. More intriguing, however, Goode could find no such correlation for
the “non-religious” paranormal group. In fact, contrary to Pigliucci’s predic-
tion, Goode concluded that “non-religious paranormalists know about as
much science, and reason as scientifically, as persons who reject the validity


 27. Ibid., 291.
 28. Ibid., 294.
 29. Goode, “Education, Scientific Knowledge, and Belief in the Paranormal”, 26–7.


                                                                                     339
egil asprem



of paranormal or extrascientific forces”.30 It would seem, then, that a decent
understanding of scientific method and critical thinking is yet another factor
which fails to predict the belief or disbelief in the paranormal.
   While the prominence of paranormal ideas among highly educated peo-
ple must be considered well-documented, there are as of yet no good, unam-
biguous social scientific explanations of why this is the case. In addition to
the factors I have discussed above, psychologists have tried to find correla-
tions between paranormal belief and personality factors. For example, schizo-
typy and fantasy proneness are among the personality factors that have been
suggested as strong correlates for reporting paranormal experiences, and for
the wider category who report belief in various paranormal phenomena and
abilities.31
   While factors such as these could help explain why one would expect para­
normal beliefs of one sort or another to remain more or less constant in a pop-
ulation at large (given that personality types are more or less constant), they
are less helpful for explaining the explicit form of beliefs that are held, and
their distribution among different segments of a population. For these ques-
tions, social and cultural factors may be much more relevant. In the rest of this
chapter I will situate the findings we have looked at in the context of broader
historical and cultural processes. This means asking rather different questions
than those considered in sociological and psychological studies. From looking
at the distribution and correlations of “belief in ESP”, we have to focus atten-
tion on the qualitative cultural shape of parapsychological beliefs. How were
concepts such as telepathy and ESP formed in the first place? Could it be that
the socio-cultural conditions of their formation shaped them in such a way
as to be particularly well suited as articles of belief for the educated classes?
What do the networks and channels of dissemination and cultural diffusion of
parapsychological beliefs tell us? Asking these questions also gives opportu-
nity to revisit some issues over disenchantment, re-enchantment and “secular-
ized esotericism”, and relate these historically to the emergence of occulture.


ACADEMICS AS CO-PRODUCERS OF OCCULTURAL KNOWLEDGE:
PARAPSYCHOLOGY AND THE NATURALIZATION OF THE SUPERNATURAL

Psychical research and parapsychology: the professional dimension

The book Extra-sensory Perception, published in 1934, has been described
as the foundational work for modern experimental parapsychology, and its

 30. Ibid. (emphasis added).
 31. See e.g. Parra, “‘Seeing and Feeling Ghosts’”; Hergovich & Arandazi, “Scores for Schizotypy
     and Five Factor Model of a Sample of Distant Healers”; Wiseman & Watt, “Belief in Psychic
     Ability and the Misattribution Thesis”.


340
                                      psychic enchantments of the educated classes



author, Joseph Banks Rhine (1895–1980), as the father of the discipline.32 Rhine
was originally trained as a botanist; however, after encountering a whole series
of questions that seemed to relate equally to religion as to science, he and his
wife Louisa (also a botanist) decided to shift careers. Coming across the vital-
istic philosophy of Henri Bergson (which was getting immensely popular in
the US), and having their fascination with spiritualism sparked by one of its
most famous missionaries, Arthur Conan Doyle, the couple turned to psychi-
cal research – the prospective scientific study of spiritualism and other (men-
tal and physical) phenomena considered to be “supernormal”. In 1927 Louisa
and J. B. Rhine followed the British psychologist and former president of the
American Society for Psychical Research, William McDougall (1871–1938),
to Duke University. McDougall, who was himself well known for his vitalistic
theories of life and mind, his attack on behaviourism, as well as his defence of
Lamarckian evolution and eugenic policies (including racial ones), had been
professor of psychology at Harvard University since 1920 (the chair previously
held by another famous psychical researcher, William James). By relocating to
Duke, McDougall became head of a new psychology department, and had the
liberty to conduct research in his greatest areas of interest, including experi-
mental psychical research. Rhine soon became his foremost research assist-
ance in this area. Seven years later, Rhine’s book made headlines in the United
States and beyond: not only had the research team at Duke transformed psy-
chical research to an experimental, laboratory-oriented discipline of research,
but they also claimed to have found evidence for a number of technically
named “psychic” abilities, going under the general heading of “ESP”.
    The contemporary notion of ESP and its related parapsychological phe-
nomena can in the first instance be traced back to a cultural encounter in the
1920s and 1930s. On the one hand, occultism and spiritualism experienced a
revival after World War I, bringing attention to a host of “paranormal” phe-
nomena. On the other, a controversial scientific discourse was developing and
spreading in psychology and biology, focusing on problems related to vitalism
and organicism, as opposed to reductionistic materialism and mechanism. In
the context of psychical research, these two impulses temporarily met over
questions of disenchantment: is a worldview completely stripped of “mysteri-
ous incalculable forces” able to grasp all the phenomena of the world in which
we live? Less of an unstoppable, irreversible process at the heart of moder-
nity, disenchantment was rather a serious intellectual problem that scientists,
philosophers and educated laymen were struggling with. As several histori-
ans of science have pointed out, fierce debates about reductionism, deter-
minism/indeterminacy, vitalism and even causality raged across disciplines



 32. See especially Mauskopf & McVaugh, The Elusive Science, 102–30. Cf. Asprem, “A Nice
     Arrangement of Heterodoxies”.


                                                                                   341
egil asprem