Finally, and perhaps most audaciously, the Church of Scientology undertook
efforts to infiltrate government agencies themselves in order to engage in cov-
ert operations. The most remarkable of these began in 1975, when the GO
planted hidden microphones and undercover agents within the offices of the
IRS itself in order to obtain and photocopy all of the service’s vast files on
Scientology. This was soon followed by a massive FBI raid – one of the lar­
gest in the Bureau’s history – on the Scientology offices in Los Angeles and
Washington, DC. Some 134 agents were involved in the raids, armed with
crowbars, sledgehammers and battering rams. In July 1977, the FBI confis-
cated as many as 200,000 documents, along with eavesdropping equipment
and burglary tools – so much material that it took a truck to haul it away.51
Eleven Scientologists, including the GO head Jane Kember and Mary Sue
Hubbard, were apprehended, tried, convicted and imprisoned; L. Ron him-
self was named as an unindicted co-conspirator, and then spent most of his
remaining years in hiding until his death in 1986.52
   In summary, the Church of Scientology not only developed a complex eso-
teric hierarchy of secret knowledge transmitted through the confidential OT
levels, but, at the same time, the Church and the US government also became
entangled in an extremely complex, often quite bizarre game of secrecy, sur-
veillance, paranoia and counter-espionage that is in many ways the epitome of
the larger obsession with secrecy in Cold War America.


SECRETS, SECURITY AND CYBERSPACE: BATTLES OVER ESOTERIC
KNOWLEDGE IN A NEW AGE OF INFORMATION

Scientology’s preoccupation with secrecy is by no means simply a relic of
the Cold War era, however. Indeed, its concern with esoteric knowledge and
control of information became in many ways even more intense in the 1990s
amid the rise of new information technologies such as the Internet. Not long
after the birth of the World Wide Web itself, the Church’s most confidential
Operating Thetan materials were leaked and soon began to circulate wildly
in cyberspace, leading to a series of complex lawsuits and an array of aggres-
sive measures designed to staunch the flow of esoteric information online. The
backbone of the Church’s war in cyberspace has been its Religious Technology
Center (RTC), which describes itself as “the ultimate ecclesiastical author-
ity regarding the standard and pure application of L. Ron Hubbard’s reli-
gious technologies”.53 Since the 1990s, the RTC has been increasingly focused
on policing the flow of information on the Internet, which has become one


 51. Robinson, “Scientology Raid Yielded Alleged Burglary Tools”, A13.
 52. Sentencing Memorandum, United States of America v. Jane Kember, 20–21.
 53. Religious Technology Center, “Mr David Miscavige”.


192
                                                                  the secrets of scientology



of the most complex and apparently frustrating new challenges faced by the
Church.54
   At the same time, Scientology’s wars of information in cyberspace have
also raised a series of profound legal and ethical questions. On the one side,
the Church has argued that its advanced tech materials are not only copy-
righted and trade secrets but also confidential religious texts; disseminating
these texts without permission, the Church has argued, is as offensive as steal-
ing the esoteric teachings of Australian aboriginal cultures or other religious
traditions.55 On the other side, however, critics of the Church have argued that
their right to disseminate these materials is also protected as free speech, and
that revealing these materials is not only justifiable but a moral obligation so
that the public can see what lies at the heart of this dangerous organization.56
   Scientology’s war in cyberspace is vast and complex, but for the sake of
simplicity here I will mention just two of the more important cases, which
developed around ex-Scientologists Larry Wollersheim and Stephen Fishman.
Confidential OT materials were first introduced as evidence in court in
November 1985 as part of a civil case brought against Wollersheim by the
Church. A remarkably long and drawn-out ordeal, the Wollersheim suit had
begun in 1980, and OT documents, including the confidential Xenu story,
were eventually introduced as exhibits in the proceedings. Despite the fact
that Scientology’s attorneys argued that “disclosure of the materials is a viola-
tion of the group’s religious freedom”, the Los Angeles Superior Court judge
ordered the documents to be made public at the clerk’s office.57 In response,
some 1500 Scientologists crammed into the court buildings, swamping work-
ers with hundreds of requests to photocopy the documents in an attempt to
ensure that the materials were not made public. In spite of these remarkable
efforts, however, the Los Angeles Times obtained copies of the OT materials
and revealed them in an article in 1985.
   In 1994 Wollersheim founded the website “Fight Against Coerce Tactics
Network” (FACTNet), designed to expose Scientology’s activities and pro-
vide support for ex-members. Having amassed some twenty-seven gigabytes
of materials on Scientology, FACTNet was, not surprisingly, hit with intense
legal threats. The Church’s argument was that the confidential OT materials
were both copyrighted and trade secrets, the disclosure of which could cause
“irreparable spiritual injury if a rival church were allowed to disseminate them”.
In August 1995, a federal court ordered a raid on the homes of Wollersheim
and another ex-Scientologist, led by two US Marshals and RTC representa-
tives. This resulted in a the confiscation of all their computers and software,


 54.   Scientology.org, “What has been the Church’s Role in Protecting Free Speech?”.
 55.   Rothstein, “‘His Name was Xenu. He Used Renegades …’”, 368.
 56.   Heldal-Lund, “What is Scientology?”
 57.   Sappel & Welkos, “Scientologists Block Access”.


                                                                                        193
hugh b . urban



and dozens of boxes of files – and in turn sparked an intense debate on the
Internet about copyright protections, trade secrets and free speech.58 After
intense legal debate, a settlement was reached in 1999, according to which
FACTNet agreed to pay the Church $1 million if it was ever found guilty of
violating Church copyrights.
   A second major war online began at roughly the same time as the
Wollersheim ordeal, as a result of the trial of another former Scientologist,
Stephen Fishman. In 1990, Fishman was convicted of mail fraud, a crime that
he claimed he had been brainwashed into committing in order to pay for his
Scientology auditing. The Church sued Fishman for libel, and in the course
of the trial Fishman submitted sixty-nine pages of confidential OT materials,
including the Xenu story and secret documents all the way up to OT VIII.
   The materials presented in the Fishman case are even more problematic
than those from the Wollersheim suit. Among them is a text alleged to be
one of Hubbard’s own Church bulletins from 1980, and a key part of the top-
most OT VIII materials. Labelled “confidential”, the text makes a number of
astonishing statements. Among others, it dismisses Jesus as a “lover of young
boys” who was “given to uncontrollable bursts of temper and hatred”; more
surprising still, it identifies Hubbard both as the future Buddha Maitreya and
as Lucifer, the light-bringer and anti-Christ:

      The anti-Christ represents the forces of Lucifer (literally, the “light-
      bearer” or “light bringer”). My mission could be said to fulfill the
      Biblical promise represented by this brief Anti-Christ period.
      During this period there is a fleeting opportunity for the whole
      scen­ario to be effectively derailed, which would make it possible
      for the mass Marcabian landing (Second Coming) to take place.59

Interestingly enough, the RTC initially claimed copyright of all the OT materi-
als in the affidavit – including this OT VIII text – but later amended its claim
to exclude the OT materials, now arguing they are a forgery. At present the
authenticity of the OT documents remains unclear. Regardless of their authen-
ticity, however, the presence of these documents in cyberspace has encour-
aged the belief among many critics that Hubbard was in fact still immersed in
the works of Aleister Crowley and continued to see himself in the lineage of
the “Great Beast 666”.
   Copies of these materials were placed in a Los Angeles court file that was
to be publicly available for two years. Again, Church members undertook a
remarkable effort to maintain the documents’ secrecy throughout this period
by consistently checking out the files and keeping them until the clerk’s office

 58. See Prendergast, “Stalking the Net”.
 59. Church of Scientology International v. Fishman. No. CV. 91–6426. (C.D. Cal. 1994).
     Reproduced online at Spaink, “The Fishman Affidavit”.


194
                                                                     the secrets of scientology