Bruce is well aware of the critique and argues that “nothing in the seculariza-
tion paradigm requires that the religious life of premodern Britain be a ‘Golden
Age of Faith’”, but simply that “our ancestors were patently more religious than
we are”.18 While he makes strong use of available statistical data to prove his
point, such data is always problematic in being open to different and often
conflicting interpretations.19 Bruce is also clearer than some other theorists
regarding the specific timeframe he investigates. In Religion in the Modern
World Bruce sets this frame from 1517 (i.e. the year when Martin Luther pre-
sented his “ninety-five theses” and set in motion the Protestant Reformation)
to the present day (i.e. the mid-1990s, when Bruce’s book was published). The
post-Reformation age is seen as a period of increase in popular religion (at the
expense of popular magic), while it also produced a thorough individualiza-
tion of religion which led to its eventual decline.20 Still, at times Bruce does fall
into a more simplistic argument, as when he states that “a world of rationality
is less conducive to religion than a traditional society”, and when he supports
the conviction of “the bulk of the social-science community” that “modern
societies are less religious than traditional ones”.21 This suggests a teleologi-
cal understanding where societies become increasingly less religious as they
modernize.
    All this raises the question of what is encompassed by the term “religion”
and what “being religious” signifies. The notion of secularization demands an
explicit substantive definition of religion (i.e. focusing on its content rather
than function), as it would otherwise be impossible to determine whether sec-
ularization is taking place or not.22 Furthermore, most proponents of secu-
larization theories seem to have various forms of Western Christianity and
its institutions in mind.23 Taken that the term “secular” and its derivates origi-
nated in a Catholic context, with secularization referring to “the legal (canon-
ical) process whereby a ‘religious’ person left the cloister to return to the
‘world’ and its temptations, becoming thereby a ‘secular’ person”,24 and later

 17. Laslett, The World We Have Lost, 71.
 18. Bruce, God is Dead, 45.
 19. See e.g. Hanson, “The Secularization Thesis”.
 20. Bruce, Religion in the Modern World, 3–4.
 21. Ibid., 48, 52. Cf. Chapter 2 of the present volume.
 22. Dobbelaere, “The Meaning and Scope of Secularization”, 600. See also Bruce, God is
     Dead, 2.
 23. On secularization as a European rather than a global phenomenon see Davie, Europe: The
     Exceptional Case; Habermas, “Religion in the Public Sphere”, 2.
 24. Casanova, Public Religions in the Modern World, 13.


312
                 the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



the post-Reformation seizure of Church holdings by secular states, it would
perhaps be sensible to reserve the use of the term to official Christianity and
its institutions.
    Even with the preference for substantive definitions, however, Durk­heimian
understandings of the function of religion as the “glue holding a society
together” can be discerned in the writings of many secularization theorists.
This has the effect of most newer religious formations not being regarded as
equal in importance to “conventional Christianity”, as they do not have the
same community-building potential as the latter. In defence of a theorist such
as Bruce, it should be noted that he is very clear on his task being the exami-
nation of the social role of religion, and not more individualistic functions.
In my opinion, however, this is a mistake. As society changes, so do forms of
community, and therefore it is reasonable to assume that the social impact of
religious formations arising under new conditions cannot be assessed by refer-
ence to old models. These problems are evident in most quantitative research
and available data in that the questions asked rarely function well when trying
to examine new functions and forms of religion. There is an apparent bias for
conventional religiosities. As Kocku von Stuckrad has noted, it is useful (and
indeed necessary) to distinguish between Christian doctrine and Christian
culture, and the common failure to do so introduces many misunderstand-
ings.25 The difference here is between theological interpretations of a religion,
and the ever-presence of it in visual and material culture. The problematic reli-
ance on theological interpretations of “religion” is evident in the earlier quote
from Laslett, and in Bruce’s of the increase in popular religion at the expense
of popular magic during the Reformation. The understanding of “magic” as
referring to “folk beliefs” and assorted “superstitions” is based on early evolu-
tionary models of religion, and is problematic both in according representa-
tive primacy to official religious institutions and religious professionals rather
than to the large masses of religious people, and in its simplistic understand-
ing of “magic”.26
    Another common ingredient of secularization theory is the idea that reli-
gious pluralism introduces a relativism, which makes adherence to particu-
lar religious worldviews less compelling.27 One problem here is that this idea
builds on the assumption that pluralism is a relatively recent phenomenon,
and that people in earlier times would have been more or less unaware of the
existence of competing worldviews.28 While it is true that the Catholic Church


 25. Von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe, 14.
 26. For the inherent problems in the popularization of “evolutionary”, cross-cultural under-
     standings of magic see Lehrich, The Language of Demons and Angels, 3–11; Pasi, “Magic”.
 27. This is the central argument in Berger, The Sacred Canopy.
 28. Pluralism can be understood in two different ways here. It can imply “the organization of
     difference”, as discussed by Kocku von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and
     Early Modern Europe, 19, or as an ideology positing plurality as something positive. The


                                                                                         313
kennet granholm



had a fairly solid ontological monopoly in medieval times, competitors such as
Judaism, Islam and the various European pre-Christian religions were always
a concern much addressed in Catholic discourse.29 Furthermore, one should
not forget the considerable internal pluralism of Christianity, even before the
Reformation.
   Another aspect of secularization theory, at times lost to some, is that pro­
cesses of secularization affect society (the macro level), societal institutions
– including religious ones (the meso level) – and sentiments of individuals
(the micro level), but not religion directly. This is in line with the strict defini-
tion of religion contained in secularization theory itself, not an expression of
essentializing understandings of “religion”. Talk of “secularized religion” would
be something of an oxymoron, as transformed religion would affect the defini-
tion of religion itself, and thus change the very outset of secularization theo-
ry.30 Expressions of religion are, however, affected. As Wilson notes:

        Secularization affects religious bodies, not only marginalizing
        them within the social system, and by causing changes in religious
        commitment within a population, but also by making it likely that
        new religious expression will necessarily emerge in new forms and
        employ new language.31

The above discussion deals with the standard approaches to secularization.
However, introducing a discursive approach brings in some additional inter-
esting perspectives. While it may well be, as many scholars claim, that the
internal structures of Christianity in themselves made secularization pos-
sible, I will focus on later developments; namely the Enlightenment and the
­ideals of secularism that gained ground here. The notion of secularization can
 be regarded a post-Enlightenment hegemonic discourse – informed by the
 ­ideology of secularism – which helps create the situation it tries to describe.
  Sociology, of course, is in itself firmly embedded in the Enlightenment project
  of progress.32 Thus, the secularization thesis can itself be regarded an expres-
sion of this discourse33 of rationality, reason, and scientific progress – rather
  than an impartial description of what is/was occurring in the West.


       former was certainly in effect in medieval Europe, whereas the latter is largely a modern
       phenomenon, or at least has accentuated in modernity.
 29.   See von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe, 19–23.
 30.   Note, however, that Wilson does call Scientology a “secularized religion”. See Wilson, The
       Social Dimensions of Sectarianism, 267–88.
 31.   Ibid., 275.
 32.   cf. Morozov, “Has the Postsecular Age Begun?”, 40, on European secularism as a “social and
       anthropological project”.
 33.   “Discourse” can here be understood as “a set of meanings, metaphors, representations,
       images, stories, statements and so on that in some way together produce a particular ver-
       sion of events” (Burr, An Introduction to Social Constructionism, 48).


314
                   the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere