Children are a topic of much concern in contemporary culture. The mod-
ern age has been marked by many changes to childhood, as well as a grow-
ing emphasis upon it. From compulsory education to the legal restriction of
corporal punishment, emphasis on the wishes of the child in divorce cases
and, most obviously, the widely ratified Convention on the Rights of the Child
(1989), children’s lives have become to a greater extent individualized, mean-
ing that they are increasingly seen as individuals in their own right.4 Since the
1960s, a growing scholarly interest has developed for studying the history of
childhood. Philippe Aries’s work Centuries of Childhood (1962), which high-
lights the diversity of historical attitudes toward children and childhood, has
spearheaded this endeavour. I suggest that the Indigo Child discourse should
be situated within this complex history of childhood and more particularly
within the field of children in esoteric religious discourse and practice.
   Before looking at the Indigo Child phenomenon, one should recognize that
children have been participants and subjects in esoteric practices and theo-
ries since antiquity. In particular, I would draw attention to the role children
have served as mediums and spirit contacts throughout history.5 Each histor-
ical context has described different qualities that make children particularly
suited to this role within esoteric practices. Currently, children’s innocence is
often seen as the defining trait that allows them special access to the spir-
itual, a shift in ideas about childhood that took place in the eighteenth cen-
tury. Historically, this definitional shift represents a movement away from the
parenting ideals of John Locke and toward the ideas of Jean-Jacques Rousseau
and the Romantics.6 This special relationship between children and the spirit-
ual or unseen realms is an entrenched conception in modern culture, or more
specifically, modern occulture.7 Manifestations of this trend can be seen in
films such as The Sixth Sense (1999) and The Last Mimzy (2007), and in books

   4. James et al., Theorizing Childhood, 7. Additionally, children are to a greater extent moni-
      tored and seen to exist in a “risk society” in which they must be protected from threats
      ranging from abduction to videogames and pornography. These two trends of individuali-
      zation and separation exist in dichotomous tension within our society.
   5. For examples, see Hamill, The Rosicrucian Seer; Kieckhefer, Forbidden Rites; or Fanger,
      “Virgin Territory”.
   6. John Locke, in his Some Thoughts Concerning Education, outlines a concept of childhood in
      which education is paramount. He envisions the newborn child as a tabula rasa that must
      be trained to rationalism. This perspective is contrasted with that of Jean-Jacque Rousseau,
      who believes that children should be left to nature, that children are innately good, and
      that they should learn through a painful process of trial and error. The Romantic poets
      have a third theory of childhood. Wordsworth and several other poets of his era described
      childhood as the best of times, saw the child as pure and untainted, especially close to
      nature and the divine, and believed childhood should be a time of freedom, play and natu-
      ral beauty (Cunningham, Children and Childhood, 5, 59).
   7. For a discussion of occulture, see Christopher Partridge’s chapter in the current volume.


352
                                                                                    the new kids



like John Wyndham’s The Chrysalids (1955).8 Indigo Children are rightly situ-
ated as a contemporary manifestation of this discourse of the “esoteric child”.
    The Indigo Child movement is a discourse of critique, revaluing children
who are being diagnosed with attention deficit disorder (ADD), attention defi-
cit with hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), or other conditions such as autism
spectrum disorders.9 A diagnosis like ADHD will mean that a child will prob-
ably receive pharmaceuticals such as Ritalin to calm them down; in the case
of autism spectrum disorders, even stronger medication and constant ther-
apy may be prescribed. These children will be pathologized and their iden-
tity will probably be partially defined by their mental illness diagnosis. The
Indigo discourse recasts these children as spiritual healers and leaders spe-
cially sent to aid in the coming “new age”. This recasting is a manifestation of
New Age rejection of “materialist” pathologizing definitions and an attempt to
re-­envision “problem children”. The Indigo Children movement has spawned
a huge market, pumping out talk shows, books, seminars, music and educa-
tional programmes that employ thousands of specialists who refer to them-
selves variously as therapists, facilitators, psychics, healers or educators. These
New Age voices hold a powerful counterposition in conflict with the medical-
ized identity offered by psychiatric authorities, both sides fighting to define the
identities of these children. John Spalding, a critic of the Indigo Child move-
ment, also joins the discursive battlefield expressing his vision of the move-
ment as a manifestation of the failures of the “baby boomer” countercultural
generation of the 1960s and 1970s. He characterizes this generation as unable
to live up to their own ideals and argues that they are now projecting their
hopes for saving the world upon their children.10
    Although it began in America, the Indigo Child discourse can now be found
in various European countries, parts of South America, Japan, and a growing
number of other countries worldwide. It has become part of mass culture and
the term “Indigo Child” has a growing meaning for people around the world.


   8. Wyndham, The Chrysalids. Although there is no evidence of a direct link between
      Wyndham’s Chrysalids and the later Indigo discourse, there is a striking similarity between
      the new breed of psychic kids in this novel and the concept of the Indigo Children. This is
      particularly relevant because The Chrysalids has often been used in school curriculums in
      North America in recent decades.
   9. A definition of the scope of the field or domain of inquiry is needed. Indigo Children are
      defined in different ways by different authors, making a clear definition difficult. As we
      have said, it is often associated with ADD and ADHD. Additionally, certain authors (such
      as Meg Blackburn Losey) have outlined further groups of “special” children such as “the
      crystal children” and “the star kids” who are also associated with autism. In this chapter I
      will seek to analyse all of these diverse definitions and categories under the umbrella term
      of “Indigo Children”, recognizing that they all share a similar discourse, and perceiving the
      crystal children and other innovations as expansions of the phenomenon, rather than sepa-
      rate phenomena unto themselves.
 10. Spalding, “Brood Indigo”.


                                                                                              353
daniel kline



ORIGINS OF THE INDIGO DISCOURSE

The Indigo Child phenomenon is relatively recent. Dating back to the mid-
1980s, the first author to speak of Indigo children is Nancy Ann Tappe in
Understanding Your Life Thru Color (1986). Lee Carroll and Jan Tober, the
authors of The Indigo Children (and among the most influential figures in the
Indigo movement), describe how Tappe “classified certain kinds of human
behavior into color groups, and intuitively created a startlingly accurate and
revealing system”.11 Tappe identifies herself as a synaesthete, in her case mean-
ing that she is someone who can see colours around people that supposedly
represent their emotional and psychological states. Tappe describes the vari-
ous colours and their relation to aura colours and personality types, attribut-
ing each colour to the people born between certain years. She understands the
concept of Indigo Children in relation to this greater colour-based typology.
This differs from later authors who are only interested in the Indigos and not
a greater context of personality through their relations to a specific colour. For
Tappe, the Indigo children are contextualized within the more general con-
cept of “Life Colours”. These are understood as broad personality types that
are divided into three categories: “physical”,12 “mental”13 and “spiritual”.14 The
colour indigo, however, is situated outside of these three, forming, along with
“crystal”, a final category, which Tappe designates as “floaters”.15 According to
Tappe, the indigo Life Colour is indicative of “a new breed of children” whose
“process is to show us tomorrow”.16
   Tappe explains that this new Life Colour first appeared about 16 or 17 years
ago at the time of writing.17 Indigos, according to Tappe, have “no lessons [to
learn,] nor do they have an anxiety pocket”; they exist without suffering from
guilt caused by external pressures and must be allowed to “do things their own
way at times”.18 Tappe outlines several physical weaknesses associated with
Indigo Children, such as allergies, difficulties related to the chest or bronchial
area, and frequent sickness in the first four years of life. She advocates the
benefits of a trained psychologist as an outside authority for the child should
behavioural difficulties develop.19 She also associates Indigos with the growth