occultism and were subsequently reframed as the “occult fourth dimension”,
“clairvoyant x-ray vision”, and “thought vibration”.42
   It is not simply the case that – as scholars of earlier generations have argued
– religious experiences have been turned into experiences of art; rather, these
scholarly interpretations are themselves part of the discursive change that the
concept of aestheticization refers to. As soon as we overcome the conceptual
barriers between art and aesthetics, and see aesthetics as a praxis and com-
munication that includes all sensual perceptions, we will no longer talk of a
decline of religious experiences or religious expressions in modern culture.
To be sure, the institutionalized forms of religion have lost their interpreta-
tive hegemony in the field of religion, and their ability to control the discourse
has decreased. But aesthetic dimensions of religion are everywhere in modern
culture, and their influence has only increased in the twentieth century. To
a large extent, religious discourse is controlled by (new) media and the visu-
ally and sensually communicated symbolic systems that populate the public
sphere.


Public activation

Throughout the twentieth century, the notion of a “public sphere” has
been a recurring issue in sociological and philosophical discussions. Ernst
Mannheim, Reinhart Koselleck, Herbert Dieckmann and particularly Jürgen
Habermas considered the eighteenth century as the birthplace of the public
sphere in which democratic civil societies could flourish.43 Charles Taylor, in
his response to Habermas and Warner, describes

      the public sphere as a common space in which the members of
      society are deemed to meet through a variety of media: print, elec-
      tronic, and also face-to-face encounters; to discuss matters of com-
      mon interest; and thus to be able to form a common mind about
      these. I say “a common space”, because although the media are
      multiple, as well as the exchanges which take place in them, these
      are deemed to be in principle intercommunicating. … That’s why
      we usually speak of the public sphere, in the singular.44

 42. See Bauduin, “Science, Occultism and the Art of the Avant-Garde in the Early Twentieth
     Century”. As a related topic see also Hahn & Schüttpelz, Trancemedien und Neue Medien
     um 1900. More examples are provided in Chapter 16 of this volume.
 43. See the overview in Herbert, Religion and Civil Society, 96–103. Interestingly, from a per-
     spective of esotericism, the same period saw the emergence of secret societies, a paradox
     that was addressed by Habermas and others, as well. See Simonis, Die Kunst des Geheimen,
     9–45.
 44. Charles Taylor, A Secular Age, 185. Taylor refers to Habermas’s famous Strukturwandel der
     Öffentlichkeit, and to Warner, The Letters of the Republic.


236
                                            discursive transfers and reconfigurations



Such an understanding of a common public sphere has been challenged by
other scholars. David Herbert notes that “the concept of a unitary public sphere
is no longer viable and needs to be replaced by an account of multiple, inter-
secting and contesting public spheres, whose inter-relation is problematic”.45
While the nature and characteristics of the public spheres that dominate mod-
ern societies – as well as their complex intersection and competition – are still
in need of further research, there is no serious disagreement among schol-
ars about the observation that during the last three-hundred years we have
witnessed the emergence of a public space that is significantly different from
earl­ier forms of public communication. This process I call public activation.
   Recently, another aspect of religion and the public sphere has been put to
the fore. The discourse on religion in constitutional democracies has tremen-
dously changed during the past decades. While the role of the state used to be
understood – almost mythically – as the neutral referee in religious matters,
the secular state itself is now getting involved in religious debates. This has
legal implications. Making use of Bourdieu’s concept of “field”, Astrid Reuter
argues:

      Today’s ”new-type actors”, who are competing with each other and
      the “old-type actors” at the borders of the religious field, consoli-
      dating these borders, breaking them up, and redefining them, are
      experts from the academic field, politicians, civil servants, journal-
      ists, and – last but not least – judges. For what has changed is not
      simply the areas of conflict, but also the forms in which they are
      being carried out: The religious-cultural climate of our days has
      increasingly become determined by judicial conflicts over religion,
      which often trigger significant public controversies. Courts have
      thus become the stages of a new mise-en-scène and controversial
      mobilization of religion in the public realm.46

With judges having to decide about definitions of religion, characteristics of
religious communities, or the active role of the state in balancing the free-
dom of religion with the freedom of speech, the very basis of the separation of
Church and state is at stake.47 Again, we can conclude that secularism – argu-
ably forming the ideological foundation of constitutional democracies – has
not led to a control of religion, but to the reconfiguration of the religious fields
of discourse.
   The four perspectives on discursive change that I have discussed provide
us with a referential framework that improves our understanding of the place

 45. Herbert, Religion and Civil Society, 95.
 46. Reuter, “Charting the Boundaries of the Religious Field”, 1–2.
 47. See Sullivan, “We Are All Religious Now. Again”; Kippenberg & Schuppert, Die Verrecht­
     lichte Religion.


                                                                                      237
kocku von stuckrad



of religion in modern Western societies. In the last section I want to demon-
strate how we can apply these methodological instruments to issues of eso-
teric discourse in contemporary Western culture. My example is by no means
exhaustive. It simply illustrates how all four modes of discursive change can
be operative together, and how discursive transfers between cultural systems
work in practice. This should be read as a vision of and an invitation to future
research into modern esoteric discourse.


AN EXAMPLE OF DISCURSIVE CHANGE: ESOTERIC
INCLINATIONS IN CONTEMPORARY BIOLOGY

Questions pertaining to the “deep structure” of the cosmos have always been
essential to esoteric quests. Subsets of such questions would look for the lin-
guistic coding of the universe, the creative power of the divine, or the expe-
riential dimensions of knowledge about nature. I have argued elsewhere that
these debates have significantly shaped Western identities during the Middle
Ages and the early modern period.48 Major philosophical and scientific alter-
natives were formulated in these contexts.
   Take, for instance, the emergence of nominalism in the Middle Ages, which
can only be understood against the background of theological considerations.
The question of whether the nomina, the names, of things, have an ontological
status of their own and thus are carriers of essentia or universalia, is fraught
with theological problems. For instance, when humans are studying the Book
of Nature and ultimately decipher the secret structure of the cosmos, they
arrive at a knowledge that was reserved for God alone. The medieval nominal-
ists thus suggested that by studying the nomina, humans are not intermingling
with the divine, because the names are not linked to any sort of transcendent
or divine knowledge (in contrast to Platonism). This strategy led to what I call
the tragedy of nominalism: although the manoeuvre enabled the emergence of
free and rational science – because everything in nature can be studied with-
out intermingling with divine realms – at the same time it was no longer pos-
sible to establish a rational and reliable knowledge of the “deep structure” of
the revealed world, ranging from concepts of the divine to concepts of natura
naturans. The idea that “science” is restricted to the revealed world or nat-
ura naturata, and that knowledge of nature is arbitrary and imperfect, while
true knowledge of the divine world is impossible or derived from “belief ”, is
part and parcel of Western concepts of scientific knowledge that fully emerged
during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
   Esoteric discourses abound with alternatives to the nominalist protection
of borders between the divine and the human. In fact, I regard the challenging


 48. See von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge.


238
                                                discursive transfers and reconfigurations