This is a point noted by several other scholars involved in the secularization
debate. For example, Martin notes that “[s]ociology itself emerged as part of
the process of secularization”, that secularization in turn can be seen as a guid-
ing paradigm of the discipline, and that “[p]erhaps it [secularization theory]
could be criticized as an ideological and philosophical imposition on history
rather than an inference from history”.34 Similarly, Casanova concludes that
“[w]e need to entertain seriously the proposition that secularization became
a self-fulfilling prophecy in Europe” when enough people “accepted the basic
premises of the theory of secularization”.35 In accordance with this, Bruce’s
claim that the motivations of specific scholars are inconsequential36 cannot
be accepted outright. As should be evident by this point, historiography (and
other scholarly activities such as sociological analysis) is always subject to the
bias of the researcher/interpreter. There is no truly objective analysis and the
scholar always chooses his limited material from a much larger body of poten-
tial data.37 Quantitative data, as used in much sociological research, is par-
ticularly precarious in this regard, as it builds on simplified categories from
the start and thus does not take into account the inherent contradictions and
uncertainties of human communication. Further, secularization theory and
the secularist discourses it is bound to are problematic in their very concep-
tion and description of “religion”. First, as made clear already, the focus is on
conventional religious institutions and their theological understandings. This
means that the actual lived religion and interpretations of others than reli-
gious professionals are accorded a secondary role. Second, and connected to
the issue of theological understandings, on the individual level the focus is
on “beliefs”. Beliefs are simply not measurable. What is measurable are claims
and statements concerning beliefs. This might seem a petty matter, but the
implications are quite real. First, “belief ” is a central factor in Christianity in
ways that it simply is not in many other religions, and even in Christianity
the primacy of belief could be claimed to be an issue of theological discourse.
Orthopraxy would seem to be more common than orthodoxy in most reli-
gions.38 Thus, measuring people’s relation to beliefs targets Christianity specif-
ically, rather than religion and religiosity in general. If people’s understanding
of religion is changing, then going by “old-school” approaches will not yield
satisfactory results. People will respond to questionnaires according to domi-
nant discourses, and including terms such as “belief ”, “God” and even “reli-
gion” will not do if discourses on religion themselves are changing.



 34.   Martin, On Secularization, 17, 19.
 35.   Casanova, “Religion, European Secular Identities, and European Integration”, 84.
 36.   See Bruce, Religion in the Modern World, 52.
 37.   Von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge in Medieval and Early Modern Europe, 198–200.
 38.   This again demonstrates the theological bias in “old-school” approaches to religious stud-
       ies. On this point, see Turner, “Religion in a Post-Secular Society”, 658.


                                                                                            315
kennet granholm



THE POST-SECULAR

“Post-secular” is fast becoming a key concept in the sociological study of reli-
gion. Just as with the concept of secularization – and possibly even more
so – there are many different ways in which the term is understood. This is
unfortunately compounded by the vague and unreflected use which is com-
mon, and there is thus a risk that “post-secular” will amount to little more
than a new trend word with little actual theoretical content, much as was the
case with the term “postmodern” in the 1980s and 1990s. There is in any case
considerable need, as well as possibility, to develop and refine the concept.39
   Tracing the origin and popularization of the term “post-secular” itself is
made easy by using Google’s new “Ngram Viewer”, a database search engine
that makes it possible to do keyword searches in a huge corpus of digitized
books.40 The graph drawn by the program clearly shows that there are no
occurrences of the word until the early 1950s, and only occasional occurrences
then and around 1970 and 1980.41 Occurrences increase slowly in the 1990s,
to go to a drastic upwards climb from 2005 onwards. This would appear to
confirm Justin Beaumont’s comments on 2007 as the year when discussion of
the post-secular entered the social scientific mainstream. He explicitly men-
tions the publication of Charles Taylor’s A Secular Age, a collection of arti-
cles dealing with “European postsecularism” in the online journal Eurozine,42
and a special report on religion and public life published in The Economist.43
Since then the academic discussion on the theme has intensified, evident in
collected volumes such as Exploring the Postsecular.44
   While the term post-secular saw some prior use in philosophy of religion
and theology,45 two thinkers in particular are regarded as the main inspiration


 39. Cf. Moberg & Granholm, “The Concept of the Post-Secular”.
 40. See http://ngrams.googlelabs.com. A search on “postsecular” and “Postsecular”, between
     the years 1900 and 2008 in the English-language corpus was done on 2 March 2011. The
     “post-secular/Post-secular” form was not included because Ngram searches do not accept
     hyphens. Of course, it should be noted that searches in the Ngram Viewer may not be per-
     fectly reliable.
 41. One of the first occurrences of “postsecular” would seem to be in 1956 in Jean Pierre
     Barricelli’s Dodecahedron: Collected Poems. The earliest scholarly occurrence would seem
     to be in Martin E. Marty’s The New Shape of American Religion from 1959.
 42. Articles published in the journal from the mid-2000s dealing with “post-secular themes”
     include Reemtsma, “Must We Respect Religiosity?” (2005); Hervieu-Léger, “The Role of
     Religion in Establishing Social Cohesion” (2006); Eder & Bosetti, “Post-Secularism” (2006);
     Habermas, “Die Dialektik der Säkularisierung” (2008). The journal also has a “focal point”
     collection of articles dealing with the subject (see Eurozine, “Post-Secular Europe?”).
 43. Beaumont, “Transcending the Particular in Postsecular Cities”, 5.
 44. Molendijk et al., Exploring the Postsecular. It should be noted, however, that Exploring the
     Postsecular is still one of the few volumes explicitly dedicated to the subject.
 45. E.g. Blond, Post-Secular Philosophy. For later works see e.g. Joas, Do We Need Religion?;
     Smith & Whistler, After the Postsecular and the Postmodern.


316
                  the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



in social philosophy and the social sciences: Jürgen Habermas and Charles
Taylor.46 The inclusion of Taylor may seem odd considering that in his work
most often referred to in this context, the nearly 900-page long A Secular Age,
the term post-secular occurs only once. Concerning the post-secular, Taylor
writes:

      I use this term not as designating an age in which the declines in
      belief and practice of the last century would have been reversed,
      because this doesn’t seem likely, at least for the moment; I rather
      mean a time in which the hegemony of the mainstream master
      narrative of secularization will be more and more challenged. This
      I think is now happening.47

While this fits well with my own understanding of the term, I would be hard
pressed to call Taylor a theoretician of the term post-secular itself. His inclu-
sion is understandable, though, as he accords religion an important role in
secular society. He could thus be termed a post-secular thinker.
   Whereas Taylor’s inclusion into the fold of theoreticians of the post-­
secular is dubious, there can be no question of Habermas’s significance. For
Habermas, a society being post-secular refers to “a change in consciousness” in
relation to religion within it.48 This change is due mainly to three reasons: the
role religion plays in global conflicts, which essentially “undermines the secu-
laristic belief in the foreseeable disappearance of religion and robs the secular
understanding of the world of any triumphal zest”; the growing influence of
religion in national public spheres, as religious actors continue to influence
public opinion and participate in public debate; and the “pluralism of ways
of life” introduced by increasing immigration from non-European localities.49
A post-secular society is essentially a secularized one, but with an awareness
that it “has to ‘adjust itself to the continued existence of religious communi-
ties in an increasingly secularized environment’”.50 Habermas also limits the
discussion to “the affluent countries of Europe or countries such as Canada,
Australia and New Zealand”, while explicitly leaving out the US as it has not
experienced the same, earlier, lapse in religiosity.51
   Commenting on Habermas’s work, Austin Harrington notes that the post-
secular does not really deal with religion “returned to a position of renewed


 46. See Molendijk et al., “Preface”, ix. José Casanova is mentioned along with Habermas and
     Taylor.
 47. Taylor, A Secular Age, 534–5.
 48. Habermas, “Notes on Post-Secular Society”, 20.
 49. Ibid., 20.
 50. Ibid., 21, 19.
 51. Ibid., 17. Leaving out the US is criticized by Dillon in “Can Post-Secular Society Tolerate
     Religious Differences?”, 142.


                                                                                           317
kennet granholm