The standard definition thus follows closely on the etymological origin of the
term, with the Latin verb tradere meaning “to hand over” or “deliver”.7 This
general understanding, however, seems hardly analytically useful.
   Another common understanding, relating specifically to the field of reli-
gion, is when “tradition” functions simply as a synonym for a particular reli-
gion.8 For example, “Islamic tradition” may simply denote the religion Islam.
This use is doubly problematic, as it tends to homogenize its subject, while
at the same time making a more analytically focused use of the term more
difficult. Sometimes the homogenizing aspect of this use of the term is even
more drastic, as when “Western religious tradition” is used to refer solely to
Christianity.9
   A third understanding, derived from the discipline of anthropology and still
in use in some historiographic research informed by the discipline, is the use
of “traditional religion” to denote religious expressions which are (seemingly)
unaffected by (Western) modernizing influences. The goal is then to examine
the particularities of pre-modern social, cultural and religious organization,
often with a focus on the role played by oral transmission of knowledge and
culture in non-literate societies. Sometimes the findings are then used to gain
insight into what pre-modern European society might have looked like, or
even getting to the “origin” of human religiosity (a kind of primitivism which
connects to scholarship on “shamanism”, which will be discussed in more detail
later on). In part, this attempt to discard the more pejorative terms “primi-
tive religion” and “illiterate societies” is admirable, but it is still problematic.
The projection of “traditional societies”, whether they be pre-modern Western
or current non-Western ones, tends to say more about the scholar’s percep-
tions of self and the society he/she comes from than accurately describing the
society/religion under actual investigation. Thus, the projection of “traditional
religion” is problematic both in potentially homogenizing its subject (i.e. pre-
senting “traditional religion” as a more or less uniform category) and in being
essentially bound up in colonialist discourse whereby the self is created by the
construction of the Other (i.e. “modern” versus “traditional”).
   The sociology of religion has inherited much from the early anthropologi-
cal and historical perspectives on tradition, although lacking the somewhat
more complex historical model of “eras”. Instead, we often deal with moder-
nity and “that which comes before”, resulting in a curiously homogeneous-
looking past.10 This is a natural result of sociology’s preoccupation with the


   7.   Valliere, “Tradition”, 9267.
   8.   Ibid., 9268.
   9.   See e.g. Richard H. Roberts, “Body”, 216–21.
 10.    For the simplification of “the past” in sociological theory, and in particular secularization
        theory, see Granholm’s article in the present volume. A good example is Steve Bruce’s
        assessment that most social scientists agree that “modern societies are less religious than
        traditional ones” (Bruce, Religion in the Modern World, 52).


                                                                                                 27
egil asprem and kennet granholm



present (and sometimes future), but is very problematic in containing sim-
plified accounts of the past, which are often based on little or no empirical
evidence. This, of course, is problematic for sociological accounts of modern
social change as well: how are we to determine what is changing and how it is
changing, if our view of the past is flawed? Consequently, it is not strange that
“the notion of tradition has received little systematic attention in the literature
of sociology and social theory”.11


DETRADITIONALIZATION, DISEMBEDDING AND RE-EMBEDDING:
A FURTHER NOTE ON SOCIOLOGY

While sociology is often hampered by a degree of historical naïvety, some of
its perspectives can be put to good use when informed by historical aware-
ness. In the present discussion of operationalizing concepts of tradition, this
applies to the concept of detraditionalization, which, as most sociological
terms, refers to a process of societal transformation – in this case primarily
changes in perceptions of authority. One thing that the concept offers is an
analytic distinction between “religion” and “tradition”. Thus Paul Heelas and
Linda Woodhead distinguish between “strongly traditionalized religion”, which
“involves faith in knowledge and wisdom taken to be transmitted from the
transcendent and authoritative past”, and “strongly detraditionalized religion”,
which “turns elsewhere for authority”.12 While commonly linked to seculariza-
tion, detraditionalization is distinct in that it “has to do with the transforma-
tion not the disappearance of religion”.13 It also does not, in contrast to many
secularization theories, imply a necessary decrease in the impact of religion.
    In Heelas’s working definition, detraditionalization “involves a shift of
authority: from ‘without’ to ‘within’”, as well as “the decline of the belief in pre-
given or natural orders of things”.14 This means that authority, when “detrad­
itionalized”, is rooted in individual experience and subjective validations,
rather than in external standards of shared cultural custom. A problem is that
Heelas’s work is informed by a simplified distinction between “religions of
difference”, “religions of humanity” and “spiritualities of life”,15 which demon-
strates obvious value judgements. Heelas clearly regards “spiritualities of life”
more favourably, and as forms of religiosity which suit late modern life bet-
ter, whereas “religions of difference” are deemed conservative, dogmatic and
repressive.

 11.   Thompson, “Tradition and Self in a Mediated World”, 91.
 12.   Woodhead & Heelas, “Detraditionalization”, 342.
 13.   Ibid., 346.
 14.   Heelas, “Introduction”, 2.
 15.   See Heelas, “The Spiritual Revolution” for a discussion of these categories, and Heelas,
       Spiritualities of Life for a more thorough discussion of the latter.



28
                                                            constructing esotericisms



   In Heelas’s view, detraditionalization is dependent on the possibility of
reflection on one’s situation, and is accentuated by multiculturalism and the
pluralization and fragmentation of worldviews and values it brings, as well as
the commodification of culture and religion in “late capitalism”.16 The multi-
tude of possible outlooks serves to diminish the power of exclusivist and hege-
monic claims to truth. This is also facilitated by previously connected spheres
of life becoming increasingly differentiated and relegated to their own separate
domains – with divisions between home and work, private and public, high
and mass culture, as well as concepts of race and national identity, becoming
influential social realities.
   A pair of terms that could be linked to sociological discussions of detradi-
tionalization, and which may even be more useful, is “disembedding” and “re-
embedding”. These terms refer to linked processes whereby certain cultural or
religious elements are separated from their various contexts (disembedded)
and situated in new ones (re-embedded). Here historiographic awareness,
including from the study of the esoteric, can greatly augment sociological per-
spectives. Sociologists tend to regard the processes of dis- and re-embedding
as in some way characteristic of modernity.17 While this is true in the sense
that the processes certainly seem to have accentuated in modernity, a look at
esoteric actors demonstrates that this practice has been commonplace among
so-called esotericists for a very long time, and in fact seems to be a driving
dynamic in internal cultural innovation – from the translation and incorpora-
tion of the Hermetic texts, and the development of a Christian Kabbalah, to
the esoteric reception of yoga and Buddhist ­doctrine in the late eighteenth and
through the nineteenth century. Even more broadly, processes of dis- and re-
embedding seem to be intrinsically linked to concepts of “syncretism”.18
   The concept of detraditionalization, particularly when coupled with the
notions of dis- and re-embedding, can thus be used to make sense of the
changing role of the esoteric today, and to align the study of the esoteric to
sociological approaches to religious and cultural transformation. If detradi-
tionalization is taken to imply a shift from “external” to “internal” modes of
authority, and late modernity is characterized by this process, then the pop-
ularization of the esoteric19 is made more understandable. With a focus on
individual experience often paramount, esoteric discourse would furthermore
seem to be a perfect fit with late modern individualistic sensibilities. If accen-
tuation of the willingness to “pick and choose” elements from many different
religions, as explicated by the processes of dis- and re-embedding, is part of


 16. Heelas, “Introduction”, 4–5.
 17. See e.g. Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity, 21–9.
 18. For discussions of these concepts drawing on the context of estoericism, see Asprem,
     “Kabbalah Recreata”; cf. Petersen, “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”, 102–9.
 19. See Chapter 6 of the present volume.



                                                                                      29
egil asprem and kennet granholm