31. John Dunlop has offered perhaps the best dispassionate, factual, though not faultless,
     reconstruction of the crisis; see Dunlop, The October 2002 Moscow Hostage-Taking Incident
     (in three parts).
 32. Responding to Basayev’s death President Maskhadov’s foreign-minister-in-exile, Akhmed
     Zakayev, commented that, though there was “simply no justification” for Basayev’s attacks
     on civilians, he believed “that history will remember Shamil Basayev primarily … for his
     15-year fight against Russian occupation” (Anon., “Rebels’ Dilemma after Basayev Death”).
     In June 2004, three years before he was installed as Chechnya’s pro-Moscow President,
     Ramzan Kadyrov told Novaya Gazeta: “He is a strong warrior. Knows how to fight. A good
     strategist. And a good Chechen. … As a warrior I respect Basayev, he is not a coward. I ask
     Allah that we shall meet with Basayev in open battle. [M]y dream is to fight against Basayev
     in the open field” (Politkovskaya, “Tsentrovoy iz Tsentoroya”). A more grudging expression
     of respect can be pried from Gordon M. Hahn’s assessment of Basayev. A senior researcher
     at the Center for Terrorism and Intelligence Studies, Hahn views the Caucasian jihad fight-
     ers as such a threat to Western interests that he has in the past advocated “muting [the
     West’s] public criticism of Moscow’s frequently brutal prosecution of counterinsurgency
     operations”; nonetheless he called Basayev “one of the world’s most ferocious and resource-
     ful jihadi terrorists” (Hahn, “Anti-Americanism, Anti-Westernism, and Anti-Semitism
     among Russia’s Muslims”, 57, 5).
 33. Maskhadov always called for and tried to practise adherence to the rules of war as laid
     down in international law. Basayev consistently rejected calls to abide by these rules uni-
     laterally but, even though he called Maskhadov “an idealist”, “a Don Quixote”, respected
     his decision (Anon., “No-one Can Prevent Me from Doing what God Permits Me to Do”;
     Babitsky, “Segodna Voyuet ves’ Chechensky Narod!”).


272
                                            new age spirituality and islamic jihad



street on his way to work”.34 This single passage shows that the whole of the
book (also) suits the pedestrian, and strongly suggests that Coelho principally
intended the book to be read by civilians. Basayev realized this because he
scrapped the words.
   Basayev was not put off by the Warrior’s occasional inanity, however,
because he found enough that he did like. In the book as a whole he detected a
mentality bespeaking a true man of faith, whose understanding of the impor-
tance of courage, will power, and the capacity for overcoming inner (spirit-
ual) as much as outer (physical) obstacles showed that he well understood the
double-natured essence of his jihad. More importantly, the author showed an
acute sensitivity to the need for obstinacy in the pursuit of fulfilling the task
God had blessed him with. He recognized so much of himself and his attitude
that, once he sat down for revision, he often did nothing to the text except
substitute Warrior of Light with Mujahid.

      [The Warrior] does not ask         The Mujahid does not ask
      anyone else for permission         anyone else for permission
      to wield his sword; he simply      to wield his sword; he simply
      takes it in his hands. Nor does    takes it in his hands. Nor does
      he waste time explaining his       he waste time explaining his
      actions; faithful to God’s         actions; faithful to God’s
      decisions, he gives his answer     decisions, he gives his answer
      in what he does.                   in what he does.35

But it was not only that the book agreed with his appropriation of the absolute
right to listen only to God for guidance on how to fight. It was also that one
passage comes out strongly in favour of fighting unquestioningly for the lib-
erty of one’s people.

      The Warrior of Light never         The Mujahid never falls
      falls into the trap of that word   into the trap of that word
      “freedom.” When his people         “freedom.” When his people
      are oppressed, freedom is a        are oppressed, freedom
      very clear concept. At such        becomes a vital need. The
      times, using sword and             Mujahid, using a weapon,
      shield, he fights as long as       fights for it to the death. In the
      he has breath and life. When       face of oppression, freedom
      contrasted with oppression,        is easy to understand; it is
      freedom is easy to understand:     the opposite of slavery. … A
      it is the opposite of slavery. …   Mujahid does not consider


 34. mc, 23; kc, 28.
 35. mc, 147; bk, 15; kc, 112.


                                                                              273
eduard ten houten



        A Warrior of Light is always              himself free. He is free to act,
        committed. He is the slave of             yet he is a slave of Allah, Most
        his dream and free to act.                Gracious and Most Merciful.36

Basayev’s decision to make the Mujahid the slave of Allah rather than of his
dream is justifiable in light of the rest of the book, which teaches that virtu-
ally all of the guidance the Warrior receives in life comes straight from God.
Though He may use signs or the Warrior’s guardian angel to speak, He usually
speaks directly to the Warrior’s heart. It is there, “in the silence of his heart”,
that the Warrior knows he will gain “an understanding of his responsibilities
and of how he should behave accordingly”, and where he will “hear an order
that will guide him”.37 Though Basayev deleted these particular words, he
retained others that are similarly inclined. The Warrior–Mujahid feels secure
in the knowledge that he is “only an instrument of the Light/a slave of Allah”,
and hence bases his decisions “on inspiration and faith”.38 When he feels guilty
at being blessed with his struggle while so much of mankind is miserable, his
angel tells him to give it all up and the Warrior–Mujahid submits: He “kneels
down and offers God/Allah his conquests/victories”.39 In fact, he is so commit-
ted to serving God that, when the divine order comes to move on, he breaks
camp and abandons his companions without further ado since “he knows that
his sword/weapon is sacred and that he must obey the orders of the One to
Whom he offered up his struggle”.40
    The constancy of the Warrior’s strict and steadfast subservience to God is
counterbalanced by the overall incoherence of his quotidian existence. The
Manual informs us now that the very moment that the Warrior begins to
walk along the Path, he recognizes it, but also that he has not always known
it, and at times strays or is forced from it.41 That he is “never cowardly”, yet
that he is “often cowardly”.42 That he wears the “indestructible cloak of faith”
even though he “often loses faith”.43 To allay the tension and confusion his life
entails, the Warrior adopts a meta-strategy. He “adapts to the circumstances”
and “treats each situation as if it were unique and never resorts to formulae,
recipes or other people’s opinions” and “has no ‘certainties’, he just has a path
to follow, a path to which he adapts depending on the season”, and therefore
“no longer judges the world on the basis of ‘right’ and ‘wrong’, but on the basis
of ‘the most appropriate attitude for that particular moment’”.44

 36.   mc, 155; bk, 37 (the Russian and English translations diverge too much here); kc, 117.
 37.   mc, 55; kc, 52.
 38.   mc, 139, 201; bk, 27, 42; kc, 106, 148.
 39.   mc, 151; bk, 19; kc, 114–15.
 40.   mc, 267; bk, 61; kc, 188.
 41.   mc, 33, 69, 43, 115; bk, 11, 14; kc, 36, 61, 44, 91.
 42.   mc, 79, 25, 169, 257; bk, 24, 10, 51; kc, 68, 30, 126, 183.
 43.   mc, 85, 101, 139; bk, 10, 32 (with modifications), 27; kc, 72, 82, 106–7.
 44.   mc, 67, 83, 225; bk, 5; kc, 60, 70, 162.


274
                                                    new age spirituality and islamic jihad



THE WARRIOR OF LIGHT BECOMES A CHECHEN

For Basayev all of this was no doubt familiar, what with his experience of
mountain guerrilla, dynamic urban warfare and frontal combat, as well
as every possible emotion from despair, hatred and sadness to elation, love
and joy. More than that, he had actually held views quite similar to Coelho’s
long before he came across the Manual. Shortly after helping to reignite the
Russian–Chechen conflict in the autumn of 1999, he was prompted by a jour-
nalist to talk about his spiritual development since the first war of 1994–6.