Like their forebears,20 modern-day disciples of Rudolf Steiner vary widely in
their opinions on a multitude of topics. This includes vaccination: While many
anthroposophists follow ordinary vaccine programmes, others clearly do not,
and Waldorf schools seem to have been the fulcrum of vaccine-preventable
diseases more often than should be their due.21 Some are generally negative
towards vaccines and vaccine programmes. This seems to have been the case
with anthroposophical doctor Philip Incao, a prominent promoter of alterna-
tive medicine and the author of a number of articles on vaccines. Writing for
the anthroposophical journal Gateways in support of the anti-vaccine organi-
zation National Vaccine Information Center, he places his remarks within a
generally vaccine-critical position, and posits a conspiracy theory he grounds
in Steiner and anthroposophical cosmology: “Rudolf Steiner’s comments …
leave no doubt about the ‘hidden agenda’ behind the plan to vaccinate all the
world’s children with as many vaccines as possible, thus devastating their spir-
itual development.”22
   There is a plan. It is secretive, destructive and directed against human
agency by blocking children’s spiritual development, thus barring them from
freedom. Incao builds his theory by first finding fault with the scientific back-
ing behind vaccines, misrepresenting along the way the state of research in
standard conspiracist manner. Since he finds no good medical rationale
behind vaccines, there must be another explanation for the implementation
of vaccination programmes. This he finds by going to Steiner, which reveals
to him a more sinister “hidden agenda” behind vaccines. Clearly disappointed
in his fellow anthroposophists for their lack of interest or zeal with regard to
anti-vaccination, he brings forward the appeal to what “der Doktor hat gesagt”.
What Steiner did have to say on the issue is more complicated. It is far from
clear that it must be read as Incao does (indeed, it seems overly narrow), but
we do see several instances where Steiner put forward varieties of the state-
ment Incao quoted, and which puts the statement in context. In a Dornach
lecture of October 1917, Steiner stated that:

      [W]hile human bodies will develop in such a way that certain spir-
      itualities can find room in them, the materialistic bent, which will
      spread more and more under the guidance of the spirits of dark-
      ness, will work against this and combat it by physical means. I
      have told you that the spirits of darkness are going to inspire their
      human hosts, in whom they will be dwelling, to find a vaccine that


 20. E.g. Zander, Anthroposophie in Deutschland.
 21. Hoggendorf et al., “Spotlight on Measles”; cf. Ernst, “Anthroposophy”.
 22. Incao, “Report on Vaccination”.


204
                                                                 hidden knowledge , hidden powers



        will drive all inclination towards spirituality out of people’s souls
        when they are still very young.23

This is an important attack on and threat towards human freedom and agency
as understood by Steiner: to become a free and complete individual capable of
moral imagination, humanity needs spirituality. What his esoteric vision tells
him, is that the evil spiritual forces of different ages will by necessity work
for a “vaccine” against the spiritual development of the age, and for a soul-
killing materialism. Materialism as a cultural force may thus seem to be the
central enemy, but through application of esoteric insight, it is revealed that
it reflects deeper forces, and that a “vaccine” against spirituality will be the
tool of evil (materialistic) spirits. They are just waiting for the right time and
knowledge to put this plan into action. If we take Incao literally, he claims that
mankind has now reached that stage and vaccines as a whole have become
such a tool where, to use his own Steiner quotation, “Materialistic doctors will
be entrusted with the task of driving souls out of human beings.”24
    How does Steiner know? He knows, of course, through his special, spir-
itual insight, which leaves him able to experience higher knowledge directly.
To all of lesser abilities, it works as declaration about esoteric knowledge. This
knowledge concerns power and agency, revealing a conspiracy against human
freedom by evil spiritual forces that work through human beings, some of
whom are organized in “secret brotherhoods”.
    In lecture three of the compilation Secret Brotherhoods and the Mystery of
the Human Double, composed of seven lectures from 1917, Steiner recapitu-
lates what is going on “behind the scenes of external events”. He starts with
a mystery: the “incomprehensible” murder of what he calls a noble woman.
More accurately, although Steiner does not say so explicitly, it is about the
murder of Empress Elisabeth of Bavaria (1837–98) by the anarchist Luigi
Lucheni. In the materialist world, the murder may look “incomprehensible”, as
it did to people such as the theatre critic who was Steiner’s interlocutor in the
text.25 Once seen through the lens of esoteric insight, however, it is all made
sensible: spiritually inclined people, Steiner reveals, will now develop towards
something belonging to the “sixth post-Atlantean age”. These will be less inter-
ested in “matters of the physical plane”, leaving more earthly power to those
less spiritually inclined.26 Put another way, the very vision of human develop-
ment towards freedom by spiritual development, is threatened because spir-
itual development leaves those of higher knowledge less interested in material,
political agency. By default, this leaves influence in earthly affairs, including
the power to hinder spirituality (thus freedom and agency), vulnerable for

 23.   Steiner, “Fall of the Spirits of Darkness, Lecture 13”.
 24.   Steiner, quoted in Incao, “Report on Vaccination”.
 25.   Steiner, Secret Brotherhoods, 77.
 26.   Ibid., 81.


                                                                                             205
asbjørn dyrendal



appropriation by powers of evil. “Secret brotherhoods” of occultists are of
the latter kind. Since they are probably possessed and greedy for knowledge
and power, they have been killing people, seemingly wantonly. Why? Because,
Steiner tells us, the souls of those killed may be used to gather knowledge and
power, and transmitted from the dead through trained mediums.27
     What relates this theory of assassination by occultists for evil, esoteric pur-
poses to vaccination? Both are related through the underlying forces at work in
time: “During the fifth post-Atlantean epoch the human being’s physical appa-
ratus for thinking will become mature enough to comprehend fully certain
elements of disease, certain processes of healing, and connections between
natural processes and diseases.”28 This knowledge may be used for good or for
ill, and must be brought about in its right time. The purposes of the conspiracy
are of course other; “to get those secrets into one’s clutches for the purposes
of turning in a certain direction that have to do with processes of disease, and
also of procreation”.29 The secret knowledge of a “vaccine” against spirituality
thus seems one of the goals of assassinations, and the secret societies seek it to
promote their goal of power. Materialism is one part of a ploy for power, and it
will express itself as a determined attempt at rooting out spiritual inclination.
It will do so in a fairly radical manner,

        by bringing out remedies to be administered by inoculation, just
        as inoculations have been developed as a protection against dis-
        eases, only these inoculations will influence the human body in a
        way that will make it refuse to give a home to the spiritual inclina-
        tions of the soul.30

Thus the apparently random is made to make sense: secret ways of knowledge
reveal the secret brotherhoods, the evil spirits influencing them, the deeper
tendencies of the time, and their connection to minute details of history.
The topic of threats towards spiritual agency and human freedom, framed in
Steiner’s anthroposophy, is an undercurrent through it all. But we may note
that although “inoculations” are mentioned as part of the materialist con-
spiracy of evil powers, Steiner clearly differentiates between existing vaccines
against diseases, and those to come, which will be against the spirit. The con-
flation made by Incao is easily understandable from many other uses Steiner
made of the same trope, but it is produced by later interpretation. That is not
the case with our next example.




 27.   Ibid., 85–89.
 28.   Ibid., 82.
 29.   Ibid., 90.
 30.   Ibid., 91.


206
                                                        hidden knowledge , hidden powers



Anton LaVey and the invisible war