From the very birth of sociology in the mid-nineteenth century, the eventual
demise of religion was seen as inevitable. In recent times, however, increasing
numbers of sociologists, social commentators and social theorists have come
to describe the current state of Europe as “post-secular”. What is suggested is
not a straightforward “return of religion”, but rather an awareness of the con-
tinued relevance of religion in secular societies, as well as changing percep-
tions of what actually counts as religion, what functions it may have and where
it can be located. Quite naturally, the post-secular should be conceived of as
having relevance for the esoteric as well. In fact, if looking at new arenas of
religion (and I am thinking in particular of popular culture), we might even be
witnessing a popularization of the esoteric that is unprecedented in Western
religious history.
    In this chapter I will be looking at secularization theory, and link it to
recent discussions on the post-secular. I will then address, somewhat briefly
and introductorily, potential transformations and further effects on the eso-
teric from both secularism and post-secularism. Finally, I will provide a few
examples of the intersection of the secular, the post-secular and the esoteric
on a particular genre of popular culture: science fiction film and television.


SECULARIZATION THEORY

The first thing to note when discussing secularization is that we are not deal-
ing with a single theory. Rather, there are numerous distinct theories with
different premises and focal points, and there has even been talk of a “secu-
larization paradigm”.1 While it is difficult to untangle the complex that is the


   1. Martin, On Secularization, 9; Bruce, God is Dead, 2.


                                                                            309
kennet granholm



secularization paradigm, Paul Heelas and Linda Woodhead’s division into four
main approaches to secularization is, while somewhat simplified, a good start-
ing point.2 The approaches are:

    •   the disappearance thesis;
    •   the differentiation thesis;
    •   the de-intensification thesis; and
    •   the coexistence thesis.

The meaning of the first and last of these approaches is more or less obvious,
but the second and third may need some clarification. Somewhat simplified,
the second approach indicates that religion, due to societal differentiation,
becomes simply a subsystem among others, such as economy, science and
education.3 Due to this, religion loses cultural and societal significance. The
third approach posits that religion might remain a societal factor, but in a less-
intense and essentially powerless form. What is common to all approaches is
that secularization lessens the overall societal impact of religion, and weakens
its influence on other societal spheres.4
    As already mentioned, the idea of the disappearance of religion was at the
core of sociology from the very start of the discipline, with authors such as
August Comte, Karl Marx, Émile Durkheim and Max Weber all working on
the basis of this supposition. However, the unfortunate fate of religion was
stated as a simple fact, and it was not until the second half of the twentieth
century that systematic theories of secularization started to be developed.5
According to Karel Dobbelaere, these theories were developed on the basis of
Emile Durkheim’s idea of societal differentiation, Max Weber’s idea of ration-
alization, and Ferdinand Tönnies’s distinction of Gemeinschaft (community)
and Gesellschaft (society).6 While it is correct to talk of a secularization para-
digm, it would be erroneous to claim that the perspective was uncontested.
The debate over the ­factuality of secularization has been ongoing since at least
the 1960s,7 and it has often taken fairly ugly dimensions with different fac-
tions regularly ridiculing each other in quite an unprofessional manner. The
apparent resurgence of religion in the West in recent decades has lessened the
overall appeal of secularization theories. For example, Peter Berger, who was

   2. Woodhead & Heelas, “Secularization”, 307–8.
   3. Dobbelaere, “The Meaning and Scope of Secularization”, 600–601.
   4. Heelas, “The Spiritual Revolution”, 375.
   5. Dobbelaere, “The Meaning and Scope of Secularization”, 599. For examples see Herberg,
      “Religion in a Secularized Society” (1962/3); Berger & Luckmann, “Secularization and
      Pluralism” (1966); Luckmann, The Invisible Religion (1967); Berger, The Sacred Canopy
      (1967).
   6. Dobbelaere, “The Meaning and Scope of Secularization”, 599.
   7. For early critiques of secularization theories see e.g. Martin, “Towards Eliminating the
      Concept of Secularization”; Shiner, “The Concept of Secularization in Empirical Research”.


310
                  the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



one of the first to develop a systematic secularization thesis, has come to claim
that we are now witnessing a “de-secularization”.8
   Current theories of secularization are very complex, something which
opponents of secularization theory do not always acknowledge.9 The theories
often involve several layers of analysis. Dobbelaere points to three distinct, but
connected, levels: “the societal or macro-level, the organizational or meso-
level, and the individual or micro-level”.10 On a societal level we may be dealing
with the separation of Church and state, which in turn encourages organiza-
tional differentiation where functions previously held by the Church organiza-
tion are separated from it.11 The result is the formation of secular institutions
dealing with e.g. medicine and education, as well as the creation of a separate
realm for the religious. An example of organizational adjustment to the new
societal conditions produced by secularization is the ecumenical activities of
many churches, implying a tolerance on the level of the religious institution.12
On the individual level we see the individualization and compartmentalization
of religion, where religious belief and activity become separated from both
the public sphere and the individual’s everyday life.13 José Casanova similarly
identifies several elements of secularization theory, where the notion of soci-
etal differentiation in modernity forms the core and, in Casanova’s opinion, an
unassailable fact.14 The two sub-theories most often connected to this core are
the decline and the ­privatization of religion.15 Casanova sees these three theo-
ries as distinct, and the latter two as dubious.
   Even with the diversity in the field, all secularization theory is united in the
basic premise that “[t]o talk of secularization is to suppose that the present is
less religious than the past”.16 Critics often argue that advocates of seculariza-
tion theory overestimate the religiousness of the past, and there is some truth
to this critique. Secularization theorists have at times based their estimates
of the past on very scant empirical evidence. Peter Laslett, though a historian
rather than a sociologist of religion, represents this in naming one of his books
The World We Have Lost. Problematically, he asserts that:

   8. Berger, The Sacred Canopy; cf. Berger, “Secularization and De-secularization”, 292. On
      the other hand, there are scholars such as David Martin who criticized the concept of
      secularization already in the 1960s (see Martin, “Towards Eliminating the Concept of
      Secularization”), but who later developed a “general theory of secularization” (see Martin,
      A General Theory of Secularization; Martin, On Secularization).
   9. Bruce, God is Dead, 4–29, is perhaps the best example of the complexity of secularization
      theory, and definitely too intricate to discuss in any detail in the present context.
 10. Dobbelaere, “The Meaning and Scope of Secularization”, 600.
 11. Ibid., 602–5.
 12. Ibid., 608.
 13. Ibid., 605–7.
 14. It should be noted, however, that Casanova has more recently discussed “de-­differentiation”.
      See Casanova, “Rethinking Secularization”.
 15. Casanova, Public Religions in the Modern World, 19–20.
 16. Bruce, God is Dead, 45.


                                                                                             311
kennet granholm



       All our ancestors were literal believers, all of the time. Their beliefs
       were not only religious, of course, since they believed in witchcraft,
       evil and benign, and gave credence to many propositions and prac-
       tices condemned by theologians as heathen survivals.17