This illustrates Spalding’s core thesis: that the Indigo discourse exists to ease
the conscience of the idealistic baby boomer generation. Spalding perceives
the Indigos as wishful thinking on the part of the baby boomers, who see the
Indigos as here to fix all the problems of the world, many of which the baby
boomers feel were their own responsibility. He highlights the passivity within
certain New Age discourses in which emphasis is placed upon an impend-
ing salvation; in this case “there is no need to worry about the problems of
the world because the Indigo Children will save us”. Spalding’s response to the
Indigo discourse is largely articulated through ridicule and an attempt to point
out the absurdity of Indigo Child advocates. He states that “it is tempting to
counter all this talk of transcendence with the observation that a generation
deeply wowed by Christina Aguilera is unlikely to change the world”.87
   Spalding outlines a huge divide between the will of the parents and the
actions of the children, between ideals and actualities. Following the line of
Spalding’s argument, I would argue that Indigo Children do, in part, represent
an element of wish fulfilment on the part of New Age parents but that the dis-
course represents something more. Indigo Children represent a new valuing
of children and children’s insights. They reflect a growing trend toward enga­
ging with the opinions of children and seeing them in a more democratized
fashion.


INDIGO CHILDREN AND EMPOWERED CHILDHOOD

The Indigo discourse may be seen as a very visible manifestation of the
empowerment of children. Indigo Children are described as being here with
a message and a mission. They represent a role reversal in which the parent
is expected to speak to them respectfully, as if they were adults, and to lis-
ten to what the Indigos have to say. The parent is even encouraged to “take
notes” of what their child is saying, as if they were a disciple of their child,
since the Indigo could be sharing special teachings from higher sources.88 The
Indigo Children are claimed to remember past lives, see the dead, commu-
nicate with spirits, and in general have access to a world of experience that
parents are denied. As mentioned, Indigo Children are part of a long-lived


 87. Spalding, “Brood Indigo”.
 88. Indigo Evolution.


370
                                                                    the new kids



discourse about children and their spiritual powers. The discourse of Indigo
Children takes its place as the most recent manifestation of esoteric concep-
tions of childhood.
   The Indigo Child movement is in line with the growing emphasis on chil-
dren and children’s welfare in our society. Despite the fears of certain scep-
tics, many of the suggestions of the Indigo movement seem to be in line
with contemporary parenting advice. The parents of the Indigo Children are
encouraged to stop feeding them junk food, to listen, and be respectful of
their children. The largest fears of the sceptics are the potential for withhold-
ing medical or psychological help from those who need it, and the possibility
of spoilt children with overblown egos. The discourse of the Indigo Children
is about revaluing children who are seen, by their parents and other adher-
ents to New Age ideas, to have been delegitimized by modern culture and the
mental health system. The sources for the Indigo Children are embedded in
the twentieth-century New Age movement and the roots of that movement
in nineteenth-century Theosophy and New Thought. Through the work of
Tappe, Carroll, Tober, Virtue and many others, this discourse has grown to
global proportions. These children of the New Age form an integral part of the
complex religious landscape of the twenty-first century.




                                                                             371
chapter 18

A SMALL-TOWN HEALTH CENTRE IN SWEDEN
PERSPECTIVES ON THE WESTERN ESOTERICISM DEBATE

Liselotte Frisk




In this chapter I intend to discuss some features prominent on the contempo-
rary spiritual (or post-secular) scene in Sweden in the context of the Western
esotericism debate, as well as to relate parts of the research on Western eso-
tericism to selected research about new religious movements and contempo-
rary expressions of religion.
   The concept of Western esotericism has been used in a number of differ-
ent ways. In this chapter various themes are discussed from several of these
perspectives, (sometimes in relation to each other): the dynamics of religious
change, the relationship between Western esotericism and mainstream/estab-
lished churches, and individual inner experience. These and related themes
are also important in two theoretical perspectives about new religious move-
ments and contemporary expressions of religion discussed in this chapter:
Stark and Bainbridge’s theory of religion, and Riis and Woodhead’s approach
to the sociology of emotion. These themes form the central discussion in the
present chapter.
   The empirical material used for this study derives from a local mapping
project of religion and worldviews that I have been conducting in Sweden
since 2008.1 Dalarna is a local area in Sweden, situated around 250 km north-
west of Stockholm, with about 270,000 inhabitants. All groups with religious
social activities or meetings with some kind of religious connotation in a
broad sense (with two or more participants present) have been mapped, with
special focus on activities outside traditional Christianity. In this study, I make
use of a semi-structured interview with Anette Hansson, a life yoga teacher
and stress therapist.


   1. I am conducting this study together with Peter Åkerbäck, Stockholm University, with
      financial support from The Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet).



372
                                               a small - town health centre in sweden



  First, I will give a very short summary of the Western esotericism debate.
After that, I will sum up the perspectives of Stark and Bainbridge, and Riis and
Woodhead. Then follows a description of the health centre in Dalarna, leading
up to a discussion where the different perspectives are related to the contem-
porary situation, focusing on the three themes mentioned above.
  Three main arguments will be advanced in the chapter:

   • that instead of contemporary spirituality being conceived of as a “part of ”
     Western esotericism, esotericism in the historical sense should be seen
     as one among several sources of influence on contemporary spirituality;
   • that the focus on gnosis and experience in attaining “higher knowledge”
     in some of the typological and discursive approaches to esotericism
     should be linked to a broader discussion of “religious experience” that is
     currently taking shape in the study of religion; and
   • that a focus on deviance, margin–mainstream conflicts and rejected
     knowledge as a structural feature in esotericism should be brought into a
     broader discussion of tension between religious groups and mainstream
     society, and, increasingly in the contemporary scene, should be ques-
     tioned and nuanced.

The final conclusion is that Western esotericism as a field of research could
benefit from, and contribute to, select sociological research from other fields.


THE WESTERN ESOTERICISM DEBATE

The recent debate about theory, definition and delimitation in the study of
esotericism has revealed that the term itself is being employed in a number of
different and sometimes conflicting ways. Olav Hammer has noted that two
usages of the concept of esotericism dominate in scholarly literature.2 The first
and most central one defines Western esotericism in historical and geographic
terms as a specific set of historically related currents in the West. This usage
originates with Antoine Faivre’s well-known definition of Western esotericism
as a form of thought, identifiable by the presence of six fundamental charac-
teristics or components. The first four are “intrinsic”, meaning that they must
all be present for a given material to be classified under the rubric of esoteri-
cism. These are: correspondences, living nature, imagination and mediations,
and experience of transmutation. To those characteristics two more compo-
nents are added, which are not seen as fundamental, but are nevertheless often
present: “the praxis of the concordance” and special forms of “transmission”.3

   2. Hammer, “Esotericism in New Religious Movements”, 445–6.
   3. Faivre, Access to Western Esotericism, 10–15.



                                                                                 373
liselotte frisk