we find examples of the combination of right-wing phil­osophy, political
Traditionalism, and occult–esoteric thought in other parts of the world. In
Scandinavia, a radical expression of the right emerged with Allgermanische
Heidnische Front (AHF) in the 1990s. This group was established in the wake
of a sudden rise in anti-Christian sentiments among the youth, in particular
in the burgeoning Norwegian Black Metal scene, which became infamous
because of the numerous church arsons and even murders associated with
it.50 The AHF had regional websites in numerous European countries, with a
focal point in Scandinavia, where the Swedish Heathen Front published the
magazine Budkavlen, featuring articles on the previously mentioned völkisch
occultists.51 As recently as 2007, the Swedish right-wing metal band Fyrdung
released their third album Hyperborea, which featured quotes from Savitri
Devi and Evola, as well as a song entitled “Children of the Black Sun”. In Italy
we likewise find several groups involved in right-wing esotericism, the most
prominent examples being the cultural crypto-Fascist group Raido and a
group called Centro Studi la Runa which publishes the magazine Algiza on
religion, mythology, and Indo-European tradition.52 A final German example,
in addition to the Thule-Seminar already mentioned, is the now defunct group
Sonnenwacht, in the publications of which Ariosophy and völkisch national-
ism, as well as the Black Sun symbol, were prominent topics.53
    Having demonstrated the radical right’s frequent use of esoteric notions
and symbolism with numerous examples, let us now see if we can identify
some common denominators and patterns. Are these examples of esoteric
transfers part of a larger ideological constellation? It is my contention that
nearly all of the above examples fall within one side of an established narra-
tive and dichotomy. On the one hand, modern society with its values of egali-
tarianism and individualism, which according to the radical right are basically
derived from secularized Christianity, and on the other hand, an anti-modern
opposition to the establishment and its values, based on what is perceived as
indigenous pagan values. I claim that the radical right constructs a grand nar-
rative in which it places itself within a marginalized pagan opposition to a sec-
ularized Christian establishment. This narrative, construed in opposition to a
similar anti-esoteric narrative within the mainstream, will be discussed in the
final part of this article, but let us here look at how the radical right itself per-
ceives and constructs the narrative, beginning with the radical right’s view of
Christianity as the cause of modernity.
    According to the New Right the Reformation helped undermine the social
authority of religion, resulting in the dissolution of society:


 50.   Søderlind & Moynihan, Lords of Chaos.
 51.   Svensk Hednisk Front, Budkavlen.
 52.   Centro Studi La Runa, “Info”.
 53.   For a more detailed examination of the radical right in Germany and its use of the Black
       Sun and other esoteric symbols see Sünner, Schwarze Sonne.


                                                                                          255
jacob christiansen senholt



        The secularizing forces it [Protestantism] unleashed shattered the
        old Biblical myths, dislodged transcendental references, and dis-
        credited Christianity among the European masses, most of whom
        today remain Christian in name only. This, though, marked not the
        end of Christian influence. Its most distinct beliefs have since been
        profaned and incorporated into the modernist project. Liberalism,
        for example, secularized the church’s universalism, egalitarianism,
        and individualism, in the process reformulating Christian charity
        as humanitarianism, hope as progress, redemption as abundance.54

Thus Christian values survived in the liberal, modern society. The Enlight­
en­ment and liberalism are seen as the culmination and secularization of
Christian values, and the fact that these are still embedded in modern soci-
ety means that Christianity still constitutes a threat to European identity: “the
Entzauberung [disenchantment] was not halted mid-route. In this regard, the
rationalism of the ‘Enlightenment,’ far from constituting the antithesis of bib-
lical monotheism, represents rather its profane transposition and ineluctable
culmination”.55
   The radical right unanimously, in one form or another, sees European pre-
Christian traditions as the only real and credible alternative to Christi­anity,
and as a form of spirituality that both acts as a bulwark against the “onslaught
of modernity” and at the same time is a fulfilling tradition in line with basic
European values. This does not necessarily imply practising pre-Christian
religions per se, but rather to employ a “philosophical paganism” which pro-
vides people with a codex by which to live their everyday lives. According to
the New Right, (neo)paganism is neither a cult phenomenon, involving reli-
gious practice, nor Christianity turned upside down. Rather, it has a positive
and autonomous content. De Benoist stresses that the cultural focus should
be on the pre-Christian origins of Europe.56 The French organization GRECE
(Groupement de recherche et d’études pour la civilisation européenne) con-
tributed to this debate by publishing Les Traditions d’Europe; an attempt at
an overview of all the different non-Christian European traditions. Another
leading figure within the French New Right scene was Jean Haudry, a pro-
fessor at the University of Lyon whose Les Indo-Européenes was translated
into both English and German.57 One of the reasons that Haudry is applauded
by the New Right is that he supports the so-called “arctic hypothesis” of the
Indo-European homeland.58 From the beginning, Indo-European history and


 54.   O’Meara, New Culture, New Right, 96–7.
 55.   De Benoist, On Being a Pagan, 103.
 56.   Ibid., 10.
 57.   Haudry, Les Indo-Européens.
 58.   The thesis of an “arctic” home of the Indo-Europeans was first put forth by the Indian
       nationalist Bal Gangadhar Tilak in his book The Arctic Home in the Vedas (1903). Tilak


256
                                                 radical politics and political esotericism



language has been essential in the New Right project of defining European
identity, understanding the Indo-Europeans as the indigenous tribes of
Europe: “[L]a Nouvelle Droite postule, depuis sa fondation, l’idée selon laquelle
les Indo-Européens, ethnie à l’origine de la majorité des langues européennes
et élément important de la civilisation européenne, est le peuple indigène de
l’Europe.”59 In tune with the New Right’s project, one of the most interesting
ideas of how paganism survived Christianity is set forward by cultural phil­
osopher Sigrid Hunke in her book Europas andere Religion where she analy-
ses the past 1500 years of European religious history. Hunke identifies certain
ideological patterns which she claims are part of European consciousness,
patterns which manifest as heresy during the time of Christianity; a heresy
that, according to her, has tried to overcome the strong dualism imposed by
Christianity throughout history.60 She indentifies a number of mystics, self-
taught geniuses and scientists, ranging from Antiquity up to the present day,
who are representatives of “Europe’s other religion” (i.e. “paganism”).61 Hunke
thus attempts to add credibility to the New Right’s idea of a “pagan” mental-
ity that has survived the Christianization of Europe, as a mythical mental-
ity in a world dominated by a rational logos. The basic distinction between
Christianity and “paganism” in terms of a spiritual divide is thus the difference
between mythos and logos:

        Logos – especially in its modern form – empties the world of those
        mythic truths that once constituted the essence of the European
        project. Against this “disenchantment”, which leaves the European
        powerless before the great challenges threatening him, a revival
        of Europe’s mythic heritage holds out the prospect that the true
        sources of his being might be recovered and the European project
        reborn.62

Rather than understanding myths as fantastical stories of the past, the radi-
cal right sees myths as models of behaviour, providing basic narratives of
what a people and culture is and can be. Following Mircea Eliade they see
myths as “creative and exemplary”, generating “dimensions of truth inacces-
sible to rational experience” and providing a “normative framework that lends

       argued that the Vedas could only have been composed in the arctic and later brought south
       by the Aryan invasion.
 59.   “[T]he New Right postulates, since its foundation, the idea that the Indo-Europeans, the
       ethnic origin of most European languages and an important part of European civilization,
       is the indigenous people of Europe”. François, Les Néo-paganismes et la Nouvelle Droite, 53
       (my translation).
 60.   See for example the use of Hunke in de Benoist, On Being a Pagan, 172, and Hunke, “Kampf
       um Europas Religiöse Identität”, 75.
 61.   Hunke, Europas Andere Religion; Junginger, “Sigrid Hunke (1913–1999)”, 151.
 62.   O’Meara, New Culture, New Right, 102.


                                                                                             257
jacob christiansen senholt