details of Hitler, whom Stein claims to have known, as well as Hitler’s sup-
posed interest in esotericism. More specifically, Ravenscroft details how Hitler
since his early youth had been fascinated with the Grail mythos, inspired by
the medi­eval novel Parzival and Wagner’s Parsifal and Lohengrin, and that he
already at an early age was set on acquiring the “Spear of Destiny”, the spear
of the Roman soldier Longinus that supposedly pierced the side of Jesus.
According to ­legend, the wielder of the spear would be granted immense
power and be able to control the world, and supposedly the spear has been
in the hands of numerous successful military leaders including Constantine
the Great. According to Ravenscroft, Hitler sought and acquired the spear
in Vienna, where it had been stored in the Hofburg Palace’s Schatzkammer,
after Germany’s Anschluss (annexation) with Austria in 1938.31 Not only was
Hitler determined to get the spear, but he was also initiated by two members
of the Thule Society, Dietrich Eckart and Karl Haushofer, in order to “develop
and open the centres in the astral body … giving him [Hitler] the possibility
of vision into the macrocosm and means of communication with the powers
of darkness”.32 Such stories naturally sparked a renewed interest in right-wing
esotericism, and numerous fictional and semi-fictional works were soon pub-
lished on this topic,33 providing at least part of the background for the con-
temporary examples of esotericism within the radical right to which we will
now turn. As we shall see, in many instances right-wing esotericism borrows
directly or indirectly from some of the many ideas postulated by speculative
esoteric writings such as those of Pauwels, Bergier and Ravenscroft.
   Broadly speaking, the use of esotericism within the radical right takes two
different but related forms. On the one hand, we see the adaptation of occult
and esoteric symbolism, often for superficial or aesthetic reasons, similar to
the usage of such symbolism within certain music genres such as Black Metal
and Neofolk.34 On the other hand, we see a more far-reaching adaptation of not
only symbols and aesthetics, but of radical rightist ideologies and mythologies
as well. Starting with the latter, a recurrent theme within the radical right is
the idea of a mythical “homeland”, often conceived to be in the far north. This
idea is far from new, and has its roots in the völkisch and Ariosophical currents
described earlier.35 In particular, the roots lie in the descriptions of research-
ers such as Hermann Wirth, leader of the National Socialist research insti-
tute Ahnenerbe, who, in his book Der Aufgang der Menschheit (1928), traces
the prehistoric origins of Germanic civilization to an archaic ­civilization of



 31. Ravenscroft, The Spear of Destiny, 47–88; Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 118–20.
 32. Ravenscroft, The Spear of Destiny, 230. Most of Ravenscroft’s claims have since been
     debunked in Andersson, Hitler and the Occult.
 33. For an extensive list of speculative non-fiction, see Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 321n4.
 34. See also Granholm, “‘Sons of Northern Darkness’”.
 35. See Godwin, Arktos.


252
                                               radical politics and political esotericism



Nordic Atlanteans located in the arctic.36 The idea of such a primordial home-
land is conceived on the basis of sources from Antiquity, such as Plato’s writing
about the mythical continent Atlantis that rose and later sank in the Atlantic
Ocean. Similarly, around 300 bce Pytheas of Massilia makes references to a
mysterious land called Thule which he described in the account of his trav-
els to northern Europe.37 These ancient tales have since gained a life of their
own, reappearing in many variations, particularly in Theosophy, which made
Atlantis a well-known subject within esoteric circles. The references to Thule
and Atlantis appear throughout the radical right and beyond, being adapted
into mainstream culture, such as in the comic book series and movie Hellboy.
One example is New Right philosopher Alain de Benoist, who in his seminal
book Vu de Droite devotes a whole section to Atlantis, claiming it to be the
German island Helgoland.38 Also, the name Thule occurs frequently among
right-wing groups, most prominently in relation to the leading German group
Thule-Seminar, led by Pierre Krebs. In addition to having adopted the name
Thule for its group, presumably a reference both to the Thule Society and to
the mythical geographical place in the north, the group also makes frequent
use of various forms of occult-esoteric symbolism. One such symbol is the
Black Sun,39 a composite of twelve S-shaped runes that was embedded in the
floor of Wewelsburg castle, often referred to as “Himmler’s Camelot”, which
was to function as the Germanic Vatican of the thousand-year Reich. The
symbol is used both on the cover of the Thule-Seminar’s magazine Metapo, as
well as on all the merchandise sold by the organization, including calendars,
clothing, and even wrist-watches. In addition to the Black Sun, runic imagery
abounds in their publications and in particular in their calendars, in which
weekdays are named after the Germanic gods and the dates are written with
runic numerals.40
   Similar esoteric symbolism can also be found in connection with Alexandr
Dugin, the leading contemporary thinker of Eurasianism mentioned earlier.
Dugin is deeply indebted to Julius Evola’s variant of Tradi­tionalism, and Dugin
himself translated and published Evola’s Heathen Imperial­ism into Russian
in 1981.41 Several of Dugin’s books deal not only with Traditionalism and its
relation to Russian Orthodox Christianity, but also with various esoteric con-
cepts. An example is the book Hyperborean Theory, which deals with the idea

 36. Wirth, Der Aufgang der Menschheit; Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 130. A few attempts at
     tracing the idea of an arctic-Atlantean urheimat have already been made, see Wegener, Das
     Atlantidische Weltbild; Godwin, Arktos.
 37. Godwin, Arktos, 47–8.
 38. De Benoist, Vu de Droite, 38–40.
 39. The solar symbol supposedly originates from a medieval Merovingian design on brooches,
     but its architectural use by the Nazis has led to numerous post-war associations of the
     symbol with the occult. See Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun, 148.
 40. Thule-Seminar, “Inhalt”.
 41. Sedgwick, Against the Modern World, 222.


                                                                                         253
jacob christiansen senholt



of a primordial Urheimat in the north and draws on völkisch theorists such
as Hermann Wirth.42 Dugin is thus linked both to the European New Right,
directly through participating in ­conferences and indirectly by drawing on the
same mythological complexes, and to one of the key historical influences on
the radical right. A final example worth mentioning in relation to Dugin is the
symbol chosen to represent the Eurasian Movement. Whenever the organiza-
tion holds public demonstrations its members wave black banners portraying
a classical symbol of chaos in bright yellow, an eight-pointed star, a symbol also
used by the European New Right organization in the United Kingdom, as well
as in Chaos Magick and role-playing games, such as Warhammer. Although
this could be a coincidence, and no direct connection exists between Chaos
Magick and the Eurasianism of Dugin, this confluent use is still interesting.
Dugin is likewise aware of esoteric currents and personalities such as Aleister
Crowley.43 That is further evidence of interconnectedness between Dugin and
esotericism.
   The interest in völkisch occultism and runic magic is not limited to the
Thule-Seminar, but is present among a broad range of radical right groups
from all over the world. The American Radical Traditionalists of Tyr men-
tioned at the beginning of this article, most prominently Stephen Flowers and
Michael Moynihan, have published numerous articles on völkisch occultists.44
Flowers and Moynihan have even published a selection of writings by Karl
Maria Wiligut, Himmler’s personal adviser in occultism and Ariosophy, and
creator of the Black Sun symbol in its contemporary form.45 Flowers is also
the head of the Rune Guild, a group practising rune magic, as well as a high-
degree initiate in the Temple of Set.46 During his active involvement with the
Temple he was Grand Master of its Order of the Trapezoid, a group focused
on various forms of Germanic/Nordic magic and grail mysticism.47 Flowers
and Moynihan are not the only rightists48 with an interest in Ariosophy and
völkisch occultism. Christian Bouchet, a leading voice in the French radical
right and the publisher of the magazine Résistance, has recently published
a whole book on Wiligut, through a publishing house, Avatar Éditions, that
also features books by and about Savitri Devi (in which Bouchet is also a
contributor).49 In addition to France, Russia, the United States and Germany,


 42. See the expanded version of this book, Dugin, “Znaki Velikogo Norda” (“Signs of the Great
     North”).
 43. See Dugin, “Uchenie Zverja” (“The Doctrine of the Beast”).
 44. For an overview of articles published in the journal so far, see Tyr, “Titles”.
 45. Flowers & Moynihan, The Secret King.
 46. For more on the Rune Gild, see Granholm, “The Rune-Gild”.
 47. Order of the Trapezoid, “The Mysteries”.
 48. The “rightism” of Flowers and Moynihan is a reference to the ideological standpoints
     expressed in their writings, and their implications, rather than any active political
     engagement.
 49. Bouchet, Karl Maria Wiligut; Avatar Éditions, “Website”.


254
                                                radical politics and political esotericism