From the 18th century on and throughout the 19th, as a by-­
       product of secularization and the disenchantment of the world,
       one sees them engaged in attempts at construing their own iden-
       tity by means of the “invention of tradition”: essentially adopting
       the Protestant and Enlightenment category of the rejected other,
       they sought to defend it as based upon a superior worldview with
       ancient roots, and opposed to religious dogmatism and narrow-
       minded rationalism. This process is part of a new kind of polemical
       discourse, in which self-styled “esotericists”, “occultists”, “magi-
       cians”, and eventually “pagans” as well, self‑consciously define
       themselves in opposition to religious and scientific orthodoxies.79

The adaptation and reversion of the Grand Polemical Narrative by self-defined
“esotericists” and “pagans” is very similar to the narrative constructed within
the radical right. As described earlier, both de Benoist and Hunke are good
examples of how the radical right constructs a grand polemical narrative in
its own right. When Hunke identifies certain ideological patterns manifesting
as heresy during the reign of Christianity, and when she call all these “her-
etics” representatives of “Europe’s other religion” and identifies them as bear-
ers of a mythical mentality that has secretly survived a world dominated by
logos, she is constructing a narrative almost identical to the one described by
Hanegraaff. The “heretics” of Hanegraaff become Hunke’s “pagan representa-
tives of Europe’s other religion”. The devil-worshipping Knights Templar,80 the
heretic Cathars and the many witches burned by the Inquisition all become the
true defenders of “pagan tradition” against a modernizing and non-European
Judaeo-Christian one. In this way, the neopagan right can claim the European

 78. The table is a translation of the one found in Dahl, Radikalare än Hitler?, 198n76.
 79. Ibid., 247.
 80. The dissolution and trials of the Knights Templar, enacted by King Philip IV, resulted in
     accusations and confessions that the Templars had engaged in devil worship.


                                                                                             261
jacob christiansen senholt



past of heresy and “otherness” as its own, and I believe that this, along with
the structural similarities and the almost identical polemical narratives, helps
explain why esotericism seems to be in so many instances interlinked with the
radical right.81 The polemical narrative of “the Hermetic Tradition” established
by Yates thus assists the right in its battle against modernity and for spiritual
reform:

      Yates’ Hermetic Tradition was already congenial to religionism
      due to its emphasis on personal religious experience, the power
      of myths and symbols, and the religious imagination; and from a
      religionist–countercultural perspective it was natural to add the
      idea of “the sacred” as basic to a trans-denominational spirituality
      (easily combined with the esoteric concept of a philosophia peren-
      nis), and the ideological subtext of a battle against the values of the
      modern world in the name of spiritual reform.82

Where Giordano Bruno and Pico della Mirandola are cast as the martyrs of
their time, the radical right perceives itself as being persecuted, ­proclaiming
and praising their own martyrs such as Romanian Iron Guard leader Cornelia
Codreanu,83 Francis Parker Yockey84 and Robert Jay Matthews.85 Their “pagan”
narrative is thus an attempt to combat the hegemonic discursive structures
established by “mainstream” society and its science, knowledge and poli-
tics.86 After almost two millennia of Christian hegemony in Europe,87 where
Christianity has been the main contributor to a grand narrative of European
identity, the radical right has now attempted to deliver what they claim is a



 81. For examples of such claims see Tyr, “Tyr”; Hunke, Europas Eigene Religion; de Benoist, On
     Being a Pagan; Wegener, Alfred Schuler, der Letzte Deutsche Katharer.
 82. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”, 21.
 83. Codreanu was at the end of his life imprisoned and later executed, together with four-
     teen other men, and subsequently dissolved in acid. See Norman Davies, Europe, 968;
     Codreanu, The Prison Notes. Although he was a Christian Traditionalist himself, Codreanu
     still fits well into the narrative of a dissident against the modern values present in non-­
     Traditionalist Christianity.
 84. Yockey is known for his neo-Spenglerian work Imperium. He was arrested by the FBI and
     died in 1960 by a supposed suicide in their custody. See Coogan, Dreamer of the Day.
 85. Matthews was a leader of the white nationalist group The Order, burning to death in a
     shootout with the FBI in 1984. See Gardell, Gods of the Blood, 194.
 86. For a more general description of the struggle over discursive hegemonies, see Skinner,
     Visions of Politics; Laclau & Mouffe, Hegemony and Socialist Strategy.
 87. I am aware that Christianity is not monolithic, but instead displays significant internal plu-
     ralism, as has been documented in von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge. However, I still
     maintain an emphasis on Christianity’s dominance in establishing European narratives of
     identity.



262
                                                 radical politics and political esotericism



“postmodern”88 alternative to the declining grand polemical narrative estab-
lished by Christianity.89 The radical right thus holds no illusions that their own
narrative will be hegemonic and overarching, but that it at least will provide
people with an alternative account viable in a postmodern setting: “if there is
no single overarching narrative, and hence no single absolute truth, to explain
history and justify the modernist project, then multiple developments, each
with their own particularistic justification and local determination, are not
only possible, but viable and desirable”.90
   The question then remains if the explanation of a “right-wing” essential-
ized inversion of the grand polemical narrative, and the identification of cer-
tain structural similarities, is enough to explain every aspect of the many
instances of overlapping ideas and concepts between esotericism and the
right. Although the idea of “copying” the narrative of esotericism might seem
far-fetched, it seems clear to me that the right’s penchant for paganism and the
pre-Christian mythical and esoteric past is actually a logical part of a coherent
worldview. Christianity is seen as the root-cause of the “malaise” of the mod-
ern world, and the primal origin behind concepts like capitalism, liberalism,
egalitarianism and universalism, following Weber. It is these values that the
right finds to be destructive to particularism and to the creation of a close-knit
neo-tribal society based on uniformity in culture, tradition and identity. Being
inspired by “pagan” and esoteric notions is thus not a free-standing discon-
nected trend, but ties well into the basic anti-modern and anti-Christian senti-
ments predominant in these groups and their worldview.


CONCLUSION

In the first part of the article we introduced several groups within the radi-
cal right, specifically the Radical Traditionalists, the European New Right, and
the Eurasianists. Second, we looked at the many instances of esoteric trans-
fers and the use of esoteric notions, symbolism, and counterculturalist ide-
ology within the radical right, after which it was possible to identify a basic
dichotomy in the radical right worldview; namely between “modern Christian


 88. Postmodern should here be understood in two ways, both in a classical sense, where “post-
     modernism” equals the loss of grand truths, and the openness to relative and equally valid
     accounts of reality, and as “post modernity”, a step away from modernity to a future based
     on archaic and pre-modern principles.
 89. It would be interesting, but outside the scope of this article, to consider the difference
     between the neopagan radical rightists dealt with in this article and those who uphold
     Christian Tradition in order to evaluate where their narratives differ, and to what degree
     the New Right has provided a historically “correct” analysis. Christian Traditionalists prob-
     ably still outnumber the neopagans.
 90. O’Meara, New Culture, New Right, 22.



                                                                                             263
jacob christiansen senholt