[C]urrently accepted fields of study have failed to accommodate
      certain western discourses, and still tend either to exclude these
      from study altogether or reduce them to already existing but inap-
      propriate categories. “Esotericism” is an appropriate label for char-
      acterising these traditions and making them available for research.27

While the field of environmental ethics is not an “inappropriate category” for
the study of DE, the state of the art of academic research in the field remains
marginal.28 Correspondingly, the varying interpretations of Deep Ecology, as
well as the esoteric and “spiritual” elements within them, position DE as nei-
ther philosophical enough to be considered philosophy (therefore garnering
the descriptive and somewhat dubious title “eco-philosophy”), nor religious
enough to be considered religion (likewise garnering similarly suspicious titles
like “eco-spirituality” and “spiritual ecology”). As the interpretations of Deep
Ecology intersect the criteria specified by von Stuckrad, studying them as eso-
teric discourses not only makes them available for research to a larger audi-
ence, but increases the panoramic understanding of esoteric discourses in the
current Western episteme.
   The second effect of analysing DE through esotericism is an extension of
the last. The inherently interdisciplinary nature of the study of esotericism
provides scholars studying DE the tools to recognize how particular interpre-
tations of Deep Ecology reflect antecedents, overlaps and parallels in other
discursive fields. Termed “discursive transfers”, the processes of exchange that
occur both inside and outside of DE stand as an essential area of study if one is
to decipher exactly how the esoteric inhabits DE.


     are conceived of as relevant to the academic study of Western esotericism. As such, the
     complete omission of entries on “ecology”, “environmentalism” or “Deep Ecology” is tell-
     ing, although the author of the entry on Gurdjieff states that Gurdjieff ’s “Ray of Creation”
     antici­pates “Naess’s Deep Ecology”, which is described as a “Green holistic paradigm”. See
     James Moore, “Gurdjieff ”, 448.
 27. Hanegraaff, “Empirical Method in the Study of Esotericism”, 109–10.
 28. Inaugurated in 2003 and headed by environmental ethics scholar Bron Taylor, the University
     of Florida remains the only university to offer both MA and PhD degrees in “Religion and
     Nature” under the auspices of its religion department. Notably, the University of Hawai’i’s
     anthropology department offers MA and PhD degrees in “Ecological Anthropology” with a
     special concentration in “Spiritual Ecology”, which is the first of its kind in an anthropology
     department.


294
                                  deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



THE ESOTERIC IN DEEP ECOLOGY

Scholars interested in understanding DE have no choice but to adopt a poly­
focal approach, and in so doing shift the search for Deep Ecology’s meaning
to the meanings produced by the conflicting interpretations. In mobilizing the
polyfocal approach, the following descriptions of the leading interpretations
of Deep Ecology will clarify the conflation that occurs when a scholar speaks
of Deep Ecology in the singular. More than clarifying, using the polyfocal
approach establishes a basis to determine the respective place of the esoteric
in each interpretation as well as the developments that build on them. While
the examples that opened the previous section indicate an overlap between
esotericism and DE, they failed to indicate how esoteric discourses function in
relation to the various interpretations of Deep Ecology. This section will make
the status and place of the esoteric in these interpretations apparent.
   The volume Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, edited by George Sessions,
has become the de facto primer in DE. As such, it has come to be under-
stood as offering what environmental ethics scholar Bron Taylor termed the
“generic sense of Deep Ecology”29 and similarly what Fox termed the “popu-
lar sense of Deep Ecology”,30 which is to say its most widely understood defi-
nition. Sessions introduces the volume by confronting the interpretational
thicket that obscures what he felt to be the real definition of Deep Ecology.31
He writes:

      One of the main purposes of this collection of papers is to attempt
      to clear up the misinterpretations and misunderstandings that have
      grown up recently around the Deep Ecology position, to respond
      to contemporary critics, and to lay out a contemporary version of
      the Deep Ecology position in a clear, easily accessible, but sophisti-
      cated manner.32

Indeed, Sessions goes on to lay out a clear and easily accessible definition in as
far as he asserts that “[t]he philosophy of the Deep Ecology movement is char-
acterized essentially by ecocentrism, as outlined in the 1984 Deep Ecology
platform”.33 It is important to note why Sessions equates Deep Ecology with
the “philosophically neutral general beliefs and attitudes” expounded in the


 29. Bron Taylor, “Deep Ecology and Its Social Philosophy”, 270.
 30. Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 114–18.
 31. Proclaiming to “set the record straight” in terms of the definition of Deep Ecology
     has become a common rhetorical strategy in the literature. See Rothenberg, Ecology,
     Community and Lifestyle, 15; McLaughlin, “The Heart of Deep Ecology”, 85; Katz et al.,
     Beneath the Surface, ix–xxiv; Glasser, “Deep Ecology Clarified”; Drengson, “Editorial”.
 32. Sessions, “Preface”, xiv.
 33. Ibid., xiii.


                                                                                       295
joseph christian greer



manifesto.34 By defining Deep Ecology as an ecocentric movement based upon
a philosophically neutral manifesto, it can, according to Sessions, “provide a
universal unifying ecocentric prospective” for a diverse array of religious and
philosophical beliefs.35 Eric Katz sums Sessions’s perspective up succinctly
stating, “[t]o borrow a phrase from the Republican Party in the United States,
deep ecology claims to be a ‘big tent’ within which many different fundamen-
tal philosophical perspectives can feel at home”.36
   Andrew McLaughlin’s contribution to Sessions’s volume offers both a
concise re-articulation of this position and a telling example of its pervasive
influence. As if to leave no room for misunderstanding, McLaughlin states,
“[t]he heart of Deep Ecology is its platform, which consists of a number of
inter-related factual and normative claims about humans and their rela-
tions with the rest of nature”37 and later “the point of these principles is to
define the Deep Ecology movement”.38 Thus, for Sessions and McLaughlin,
as well as other North American architects like Devall and Drengson, Deep
Ecology is (as opposed to Naess’s original formulation) an ontologically
neutral movement based on promoting ecocentrism through the following
platforms:

   • the wellbeing and flourishing of human and non-human life on earth
     have value in themselves (synonyms: intrinsic value, inherent value);
   • richness and diversity of life forms contribute to the realization of these
     values and are also values in themselves;
   • humans have no right to reduce this richness and diversity except to sat-
     isfy vital human needs;
   • the flourishing of human life and cultures is compatible with a substan-
     tial decrease of the human population and the flourishing of non-human
     life requires such a decrease;
   • present human interference with the non-human world is excessive, and
     the situation is rapidly worsening;


 34. Sessions, Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, 4.
 35. Sessions, “Postmodernism and Environmental Justice”, 6. For the claim that the manifesto
     is “philosophically neutral” see Sessions, Deep Ecology for the 21st Century, 190; Sessions,
     “Wildness, Cyborgs, and Our Ecological Future”, 165.
 36. Eric Katz, “Against the Inevitability of Anthropocentrism”, 19.
 37. McLaughlin, “The Heart of Deep Ecology”, 85–91. The phrase “heart of Deep Ecology” has
     appeared in a variety of the attempts to define DE, and is often used to reference one of
     the three interpretations discussed in this chapter. See Rothenberg, “Letter to the Editor
     from David Rothenberg”, 25; Bron Taylor, “Evoking the Ecological Self ”, 266; Partridge, The
     Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 58. As Glasser notes, reference to the “heart” of DE is
     ironic, at least from Naess’s point of view, on account of the fact that Naess’s ontology is
     based upon gestalts, which do not have hearts. Glasser, “On Warwick Fox’s Assessment of
     Deep Ecology”, 74n15.
 38. McLaughlin, “The Heart of Deep Ecology”, 91.


296
                                    deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



   • policies must therefore be changed. These policies affect basic economic,
     technological, and ideological structures. The resulting state of affairs
     will be deeply different from the present;
   • the ideological change is mainly that of appreciating life quality (dwelling
     in situations of inherent value) rather than adhering to an increasingly
     higher standard of living. There will be a profound awareness of the dif-
     ference between big and great; and
   • those who subscribe to the foregoing points have an obligation directly
     or indirectly to try to implement the necessary changes.39