While this shift towards an increasing occultural hegemony is relatively well
documented, from both emic and etic perspectives,49 the point here is, again,
simply that occulture is ordinary.


ESOTERRORISM AND THE GENESIS OF OCCULTURE

Having discussed the theory of occulture and its relationship to the cultic
milieu hypothesis, I want to return to the beginning, as it were, and briefly
explore the context within which the term “occulture” arose, because, to my
mind, there are few better examples of contemporary esotericism, the signifi-
cance of occulture, and the power of popular culture.
   Going back over a decade now, my use of the term “occulture” can be
traced back to attempts to make sense of what I understood to be an ambi-
ent supernaturalism, a spiritual environment, a culture of the occult broadly
conceived. At the same time, I became aware of the term “occulture” within a
particular esoteric subculture oriented around industrial music and perform-
ance art. The neologism, I discovered, was probably coined by the esotericist,
musician, artist and self-styled “cultural engineer” Genesis P-Orridge (Neil
Andrew Megson, 1950–), whose work with the performance art group COUM
Transmissions, the bands Throbbing Gristle and Psychic TV, and the spoken
word project Thee Majesty developed a particular brand of transgressive,
experimental, sonic and visual art. A confluence of esotericism, pornographic
eroticism, violence, death, degradation, confrontation of taboo subjects and
noise, his work is rarely less than confrontational. As Paul Hegarty comments
of Throbbing Gristle’s work, it offered “a thoroughgoing critique or even
attack on conventional, modern, Christian, artistic, moral, capitalist thought
and living”, much of which could be understood in terms of “transgression and
perversion”.50 While much of this transgression can perhaps be understood
in terms of a juvenile delight gained from extreme behaviour and the offence
caused by challenging taboos,51 one also needs to understand that, certainly


48. Puttick, “Rise of Mind–Body–Spirit Publishing”, 129.
49. For an interesting emic insight into contemporary occultism and youth culture, see Louv,
    Generation Hex.
50. Hegarty, Noise/Music, 107.
51. They will have been pleased, no doubt, when, in 1976, the Conservative MP Nicholas
    Fairbairn declared in the Daily Mail, “these people are the wreckers of civilisation” (Ford,
    The Wreckers of Civilisation, 0.12).


124
                                                                       occulture is ordinary



in the case of P-Orridge, there was, as Don Watson argues, “a deeply rooted
desire to expose and challenge the hidden mechanisms of social control”.52
It is this latter underlying motivation, influenced, we will see, very much by
William S. Burroughs, that opens up some interesting analysis.
    During the late 1970s P-Orridge became interested in “how a small number
of fanatical individuals could have a disproportionate impact on culture”53 – a
process that became key to the sociological understanding of occulture that I
was beginning to construct: micro-ideas with macro-effects. Occultural ideas
articulated and developed in films, in literature, in music or on the Internet
are able to have, through synergies and networks, a disproportionate influ-
ence on large numbers of people and, consequently, on institutions and soci-
eties.54 From a sociological perspective, because occulture is ordinary, taken
for granted, embedded in the everyday, its viral potential is enormous. This
is a significant point, which is not lost on P-Orridge, whose interest in the
influence and dissemination of esotericism is long-standing. Indeed, although
it is not fully articulated in his work, it would appear that, for P-Orridge, the
disproportionate influence of the esoteric ideas of a minority could have “eso-
terrorist” potential, if engineered carefully. Likewise, he insisted that music is
“a platform for propaganda”,55 in that an individual musician or a band is able
to disseminate selective information which will, not only significantly emo-
tively influence the thinking of a particular group of people, but, by means of
that affective manipulation, also subvert mainstream thinking and challenge
established authorities.56 When such activities are coupled with the energies
available in magick, however these might be understood, it becomes esoter-
rorism. Hence, for P-Orridge, music is a particularly powerful weapon in the
arsenal of the esoterrorist, for not only is it propaganda, but, he insists, “music
is ­magick”, and, as such, key to the creation of “occult culture”:

      We live in limbo and thirst for freedom … Vested interests of every
      kind want us lazy and atrophied … Man’s fall from grace is his fall
      from inner security. His defeat is his surrender to conditioned
      boundaries imposed by the strict regime of acceptability instead
      of the natural honesty of his individual instinct that recognises all
      things to be in a state of flux … We are trained to not even want to


 52. Watson, “Beyond Evil”, 30.
 53. Ford, The Wreckers of Civilisation, 10.29. See also Vale, RE/Search 4/5, 62–77; P-Orridge,
     Painful but Fabulous.
 54. Of particular interest is In the Shadow of the Sun, an occult film by Derek Jarman for which
     Throbbing Gristle produced a particularly menacing soundtrack.
 55. Vale, RE/Search 4/5, 87 (see also 64–5).
 56. Here, we might again mention the influence of Burroughs, who warned of the “Control
     Machine”, by which he referred to the forces of conformity that would destroy the unique
     qualities of the individual.


                                                                                            125
christopher partridge



      think. Decondition the condition. Conditioning is control. Control
      is stability. Stability is safety for those with a vested interest in con-
      trol. Let’s go out of control. What breaks this cycle is a psychic jolt.
      Music is magick, a religious phenomena that short circuits control
      through human response. The moment we forget ourselves and
      end the limbo-dance we enter a world of struggle, joy and clarity.
      A tragic, but magickal world where it is possible to accept mor-
      tality and thereby deny death. Experience without dogma, anguish
      without shame or sham. A morality of anti-cult. Occult culture. Its
      rituals collective, yet private, performed in public, but invisible …
      The rites of youth. Our alchemical human heritage, encased like a
      cadaver in a black suit.57

This, of course, is a relatively idiosyncratic and convoluted understanding of
magick and the occult. Having said that, it is intended to be a practical, protest
esotericism for a disillusioned, unemployed “blank generation”.58 Rather than

      the magick of the Golden Dawn, designed for the stately Vic­torian
      manor … it was magick designed for the blank-eyed, TV-flattened,
      prematurely abyss-dwelling youth of the late Twentieth Century –
      like the punk kids in Derek Jarman’s Jubilee, who have never ven-
      tured out of the council flats they were born in. Rather than high
      ceremony, drawing-room intrigue and exalted initiatory ritual, the
      focus more often than not became simple survival, and defense of
      individual vision from a malevolently dehumanizing culture that
      the Victorians and Modernists, even in their most racist and reac-
      tionary moments, could never have foreseen.59

Similarly, Thee Temple ov Psychick Youth (TOPY), in Thee Grey Book, states
that it

      requires an active individual, dedicated towards thee establishment
      ov a functional system ov magick and a modern pagan philosophy
      without recourse to mystification, gods or demons; but recognis-
      ing thee implicit powers ov thee human brain (neuromancy) linked
      with guiltless sexuality focused through Will Structure (Sigils).
      Magick empowers thee individual to embrace and realise their


 57. Vale, RE/Search 4/5, 87.
 58. Blank Generation is the title of the 1977 debut album from Richard Hell and the Voidoids.
     The title song reflects the despair and nihilism of the generation (see McNeil & McCain,
     Please Kill Me, 282–283). It is this despair and nihilism that lies at the heart of P-Orridge’s
     analysis of society in the 1970s and 1980s.
 59. Louv, in P-Orridge, Thee Psychick Bible, 18.


126
                                                                       occulture is ordinary



       dreams and maximise their natural potential. It is for those with
       thee courage to touch themselves. It integrates all levels ov thought
       in thee first steps towards final negation ov control and fear.60

While clearly idiosyncratic, this functional, anti-mystical “system ov magick”
indicates the breadth of interpretation of esotericism in the contemporary
world. However, to understand this particular interpretation more fully, some-
thing needs to be said about the occulture of Genesis P-Orridge, about the
various occultural streams that met in his life and work.
   A friend of Burroughs (whom he had known since 1971), P-Orridge had,
for several years, requested an introduction to Brion Gysin, the principal
architect of the cut-up method, developed in 1959 and used to great effect by
Burroughs. Eventually, Burroughs wrote him a letter of introduction and he
met Gysin in Paris in the late 1970s, probably 1978,61 and quickly established
a close master–disciple relationship.62 While P-Orridge was enormously influ-
enced by Gysin, it was the cut-up method, as discussed in The Third Mind
(a book-length collage manifesto on the method and its uses), that became
central to his thought.63 Put simply, cut-up involves cutting a text into pieces,
which are then rearranged into a new text. “Whatever you do in your head”,
insisted Gysin, “bears the prerecorded pattern of your head. Cut through that
pattern and all patterns if you want something new … Cut through the word
lines to hear a new voice off the page.”64 This method of progressing beyond
current patterns of thought and belief was, for P-Orridge, revolutionary.
Gysin, he argued,