We have left the land and have embarked. We have burned our
       bridges behind us – indeed we have gone further and destroyed
       the land behind us. … Woe, when you feel homesick for the land
       as if it had offered more freedom – and there is no longer any land.1

The Nietzsche quote can be seen as a reflection on modernity and the futility of
attempts to turn back and return to a stage that can only exist as a memory and
an idealized past. In the African diaspora, not even the memory or the language
remains to form an ideal of a lost homeland. Following Nietzsche’s description
of the state of modern man, we can claim that the African diaspora offers the
most intense form of homelessness. For a long time European historical dis-
course construed Africa as a place without anything to offer in the way of cul-
ture or history. For those of African descent there was thus no history to claim,
no cultural achievement to speak about. The culture, language and history
that were available were those of Europe, representing a culture that in many
ways had looked upon African people as being, at best, second-class citizens.
This experience has famously been described by the early civil rights leader
W. E. B. Du Bois (1868–1963) as an experience of “double consciousness”:

       After the Egyptian and Indian, the Greek and Roman, the Teuton
       and Mongolian, the Negro is a sort of seventh son, born with a veil,
       and gifted with second-sight in this American world, – a world
       which yields him no true self-consciousness, but only lets him see


   1. Nietzsche, quoted in Gilroy, The Black Atlantic, xiii.


                                                                               49
fredrik gregorius



       himself through the revelation of the other world. It is a peculiar
       sensation, this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking
       at one’s self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by
       the tape of a world that looks on in amused contempt and pity.
       One ever feels his two-ness, – an American, a Negro; two souls,
       two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in
       one dark body, whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being
       torn asunder.2

The historiography of the experience and development of African diaspora
culture in America has been filled with varied and complex responses to this
experience. Some black leaders have accepted the idea of Africa as a dark conti-
nent; rather than striving to reclaim a lost cultural heritage they have regarded
their role as being the leaders of an emerging African civilization based upon
European values. Others have romanticized the savage Africa, construing par-
allels with the Germanic and Celtic tribes of pre-Christian Europe. Still others
have claimed that the image of Africa presented in Western narratives is false,
and that not only does Africa have a lot to offer culturally and historically, but
most of what we today see as European has an African origin.3 Rather than
being clearly differentiated positions, the above approaches should be seen
as ideal-types describing general trends, and often authors have based their
approach, depending on context, on more than one position. The last position
can be described as an Afrocentric one, and the purpose of this chapter is to
look at how this approach has shaped and constructed ideas about Africa and
its relation to modern black people in America.
    More specifically, this chapter will deal with the way Afrocentric groups
have tried to construct, or reconnect with, what is conceived as a “primor-
dial African tradition” and how this relates to ideas of the existence of an
“African personality”. Questions about spirituality often arise in the context
of this quest, and attempts have been made to find a perennial essence of
African religion that is neither Christian nor Muslim, but based on indige-
nous African traditions. While often eclectic in their approach, Afrocentrists
have become more and more focused on ancient Egypt as the primary ideal.
In the development of a concept of a tradition that binds Egypt together with
sub-Saharan Africa, esoteric ideas from Masonry, Jungianism, Theosophy and
Rosicrucianism, among others, have been used.
    In this chapter, “Afrocentricity” refers to a specific contemporary ideology
that presents Africa as not only a continent of origin, but also articulates a
psychological and spiritual mentality seen as essentially “African”. That is, an
Afrocentrist believes that there is a certain African way of looking at the world,


   2. Du Bois, The Souls of Black Folks, 2.
   3. Moses, Afrotopia.


50
                                                                 inventing africa



contrasted with a European view. People will maintain this mentality regard-
less of where they live: Africans in the United States will have a natural incli-
nation to look at the world from an “African point of view”. Thus “Afrocentric”
and “Afrocentrism” are used to refer to ideas that position Africa as a place of
central and essential relevance for contemporary black people. 4


A RACE FOR EGYPT

The debate over the racial identity of the ancient Egyptians has been central to
the Afrocentric movement of the 1980s, but can be traced back to the 1800s.
Just as Afrocentric writers have tried to find evidence of Egypt as a part of
a larger pan-African culture, some white scholars and writers have spent as
much time arguing the opposite, or at least that Egypt was a culture domi-
nated by non-black elites.5
   Egypt was a problem for the white establishment in the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, and while attempts were made to show that Egypt was
an inferior civilization compared with ancient Greece, it was still difficult to
deny the accomplishments of the ancient Egyptians. With the discovery of the
Rosetta stone in 1799 (which, beside the long overdue translation of the hiero-
glyphs, also led to a newfound fascination with all things Egyptian) there arose
a need to relate to Egypt in racial terms. In the racial discourse of the US,
where slavery was not officially abolished until 1865, Egypt became a recur-
ring battle ground for both abolitionists and white supremacists.
   An example of how the racial identity of the Egyptians was used by both
sides can be illustrated with an event in June 1850. American showman and
Egyptologist George Robins Gliddon (1809–57), who based his understand-
ing of history on white supremacist theories, organized a three-day event
called “The Art of Mummification among the Ancient Egyptians”. The high-
light of the event was the unwrapping of a mummy, performed incrementally
over the three days of the event in order to maximize anticipation. Gliddon
let his fantasies run wild and expected the mummy to be an Egyptian prin-
cess. Connected to the event were several lectures on ancient Egypt and the
racial characteristics of the ancient Egyptians. Gliddon himself would look at
Egyptian skulls and proclaim: “In this man’s skull we behold one of ourselves –
a Caucasian, a pure white man; notwithstanding the bitumen which has black-
ened the skin.”6 The unwrapping of the mummy was, however, a failure for
Gliddon, as it was revealed that the mummy was in fact male and not female.
This led to Gliddon disappearing from the mummy scene, but also to some
comments from the African American abolitionist newspaper in the article

   4. Howe, Afrocentrism, 1.
   5. Trafton, Egypt Land, 9.
   6. Quoted in Ibid., 44.


                                                                              51
fredrik gregorius



“Were the Thebans Negros”, which concluded with a satirical comment on
Gliddon’s event:

      Well, the poor old mummy, was at length stripped of its swaddling
      clothes, and disembowled [sic], and furnished evidence of little else
      than that it was a veritable “he-nigger” after all. A humbling relic
      enough of Theban royalty, learning and renown.7