s­ imilar pattern, a monograph by Sarah M. Pike and an overview for the general
 public by Nevill Drury (both 2004) referred to psychedelics only in discuss-
 ing the 1960s counterculture, implying that it ceased to be a factor after that
 period.19
     That a widespread shift from drugs to meditation occurred during the
 1970s is not in doubt, and it is easy to understand that for organized groups
 (spiritual communities, new religious movements) it became a practical neces-
 sity to regulate or prohibit drug-use among their membership. However, this
 should not make us overlook the other side of the coin: the fact that putting an
 emphasis on their development from hedonistic drug use to more respectable
 and safe alternatives was simply quite convenient for erstwhile countercultur-
 alists. As they were losing popular credit due to the excesses of the psych-
 edelic era and the criminalization of psychoactives, it was in their best interest
 to emphasize the pursuit of “spirituality” as a healthy and socially responsible
 way of life rather than advertise the use of drugs. As a result, we cannot deter-
 mine with any degree of certainty how many of the experiences highlighted
 by New Age authors were in fact linked to clandestine experimentation with
 psychoactives, and how many of them somehow occurred spontaneously,
 resulted from specific drugless techniques, or were simply invented or exag-
 gerated. But absence of evidence is no evidence of absence, and the argumen-
 tum ex silentio is rightly classed among the logical fallacies. In a society where
 psychoactives were the talk of the town and widely available, it stretches cre-
 dulity to assume that the entire 1960s generation that created the foundations
 of New Age religion would suddenly have become so obedient to authority as
 to have stopped using them privately as a means to explore spiritual realities.
 It is more reasonable to assume that while many replaced drugs by meditation,
 others continued using psychoactives but just stopped talking about it. This
 makes it relevant to be attentive to passing hints such as this one by the holis-
 tic healer William Bloom in 1993: “At the very least you should know about
 [psychedelic drugs], for they are – albeit secretly – a portal of change and illu-
 mination for many people.”20
     In short, my suggestion is that after its sensational and exhibitionistic public
 phase during the 1960s, the use of psychedelics in a spiritual context evolved
 after 1970 into a private and discreet, individualist practice, which continued
 to have a considerable impact on New Age religion because of the types of
 religious experiences and visions that it produced or facilitated. This makes
 it into an aspect of “esotericism” in the specific dictionary sense of secrecy
 and concealment – but not of the well-known discursive practice of secrecy as
 “skilled revelation of skilled concealment” (as elegantly formulated by Michael



 19. Pike, New Age and Neopagan Religions in America, 83–5; Drury, The New Age, 73–4, 76–96.
 20. Bloom, First Steps, 65, as quoted in Steven J. Sutcliffe, Children of the New Age, 235n9.


                                                                                         399
wouter j . hanegraaff



Taussig21), where secrets are forms of social capital that impart power to those
who are in a position to hide or reveal them. Instead, we are dealing with prac-
tices of secrecy and concealment born simply out of social or legal necessity.
The obvious difficulties of finding hard data under such conditions are not a
sufficient reason to ignore this dimension of New Age, for at least two rea-
sons. First, simply by being more attentive to it, evidence relevant to entheo­
genic esotericism may be noted and recognized that would otherwise be
overlooked: authors and practitioners do make references to it, but often just
in passing and by means of coded language (e.g. “power plants” and “psycho-
technologies” rather than “drugs” or “psychedelics”). Second, even where there
is no strict empirical proof of entheogenic esotericism, it may still be the most
plausible explanation in specific cases, such as those discussed above. The
assumption that spectacular experiences as reported by Capra and Roberts
happened “just like that” (because we cannot think of anything better), are
unsatisfactory and in fact rather lazy from an intellectual point of view: until
somebody comes up with a better explanation, it seems much more reason-
able to attribute them, at least provisionally, to the use of substances that are
known from clinical research to have exactly these kinds of effects.


ENTHEOGENIC SHAMANISM

The only scholar who has given systematic attention to the role of entheo-
gens in what he calls contemporary “occulture” is Christopher Partridge. In a
very well-documented overview, he distinguished between three phases in the
“modern spiritual psychedelic revolution”:

  1. from Albert Hofmann’s discovery of LSD in 1938 to the end of the 1950s,
     with Aldous Huxley as the central figure;
  2. the psychedelic era from the 1960s to 1976, with Timothy Leary at the
     centre; and
  3. the development of rave culture since the mid-1980s.22

Publishing his book in 2005, Partridge sketched the emergence of a fourth
phase dominated by cyberculture as well. While such a periodization makes
perfect sense, I will be emphasizing an element of continuity from the 1960s
to the present (with roots in the 1950s), concerning a specific current or sub-
culture that is usually discussed in terms of (neo)shamanism. It is in this con-
text that we find the clearest examples of what I propose to call entheogenic
esotericism.

 21. Taussig, “Viscerality, Faith, and Skepticism”, 273.
 22. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 2, 82–134; see also parts of the chapter on
     “Cyberspirituality” (135–64).


400
                                                                   entheogenic esotericism



    Neoshamanism has attracted much attention from scholars in recent years,
but even in some of the best research we find, once again, strange blind spots
that have more to do with the intellectual preoccupations of academics than
with the subjects they are studying. The evidence shows beyond a shred of
doubt that what is now known as neoshamanism emerged during the 1960s
as a movement dominated by enthusiasm for natural psychoactives (peyote,
ayahuasca, psilocybin mushrooms and various other less well-known species),
but many scholars of the phenomenon seem remarkably blind to the evidence
in that regard. For example, all specialists of neoshamanism acknowledge the
books by Carlos Castaneda as a major catalyst (Kocku von Stuckrad even
calls Castaneda’s Teachings of Don Juan the “foundational document of mod-
ern Western Shamanism”23), but, amazingly, they tend not to mention, even
in passing, that his spectacular “shamanic” experiences were described, in
explicit detail, as being induced by psychoactive “power plants”.24 No gen-
eral reader of Castaneda misses this fact, and it accounts in no small meas-
ure for his bestselling success; so how could it have escaped the academics?
Similarly, the anthropologist Michael Harner is rightly highlighted as sem­
inal to the development of neoshamanism since the 1970s, but, again, the fact
that he was initiated into shamanism by drinking ayahuasca in the Ecuadorian
Amazon forest, and discussed it as almost inseparable from hallucinogens in
his earlier work,25 is usually treated as irrelevant or marginal at best.26
    The basic flaw in these analyses of neoshamanism is that they automatically
equate the legally enforced turn away from public entheogenic practice with
a freely developed preference for drugless techniques. For example, Andrei
Znamenski notes that Harner “purposely moved away from replicating [hallu-
cinogenic] experiences in Western settings”, searching instead for alternatives
“by experimenting with drugless techniques from native North American,
Siberian, and Sámi traditions”.27 Strictly speaking, these statements are cor-
rect, but they fail to mention the most decisive factor: the simple fact that,
after 1970, Harner had no other choice if he wanted to organize anything pub-
lic and stay out of jail. In a very similar way, the closely related movement of
transpersonal psychotherapy pioneered by Stanislav Grof was forced to aban-
don the use of LSD and develop “holotropic breathing” as a legal alternative.28
In both cases, there is no reason to doubt that workshop leaders would have
continued using psychedelics (albeit perhaps more cautiously and with more

 23. Von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und Esoterik, 155.
 24. E.g. Hutton, Shamans, 156–9; von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und Esoterik, 153–5.
 25. Harner, Hallucinogens and Shamanism; Harner, “Sound of Rushing Water”; Harner, The
     Way of the Shaman, 1–19.
 26. It is not mentioned at all by Hutton, Shamans, 156–61. Von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und
     Esoterik, 157–8, and Znamenski, Beauty of the Primitive, 233, discuss it as merely a prep­
     aration for the development of his “core shamanism”.
 27. Znamenski, Beauty of the Primitive, 233.
 28. Grof, Beyond the Brain; Grof, LSD Psychotherapy.


                                                                                          401
wouter j . hanegraaff