Obviously, the role of secrecy and esoteric knowledge in the Church of
Scientology is far too complex to cover in a whole book, much less a chap-
ter. However, I have tried in these pages to highlight just a few of the more
important examples of secrecy and information control in the Church over
the last six decades, beginning with Hubbard’s hagiographic mythology and
continuing into twenty-first-century cyberspace. To conclude, I would like to
suggest that the case of Scientology gives us profound insights not just into
a controversial new religion, but also into much larger questions of religious
secrecy and concealment over the last sixty years. Scientology is a particularly
striking example of the fact that religious secrecy is rarely simply a matter of
esoteric gnosis transmitted through isolated groups of initiates far removed
from the messy social and political realm; on the contrary, religious secrecy is
very often intimately entwined with larger cultural and historical forces, with
struggles over power, and with very real material (as well as spiritual) interests.
Above all, the case of Scientology highlights in excruciating detail what I call
the dual nature of secrecy – its double role as both a source of symbolic power
and a potential liability for its owner.
   On the one hand, the increasingly esoteric levels of Hubbard’s OT
“advanced tech” clearly served as a kind of “adorning possession”, in Simmel’s
sense – that is, a source of status, prestige and power that enhances one’s
character precisely by virtue of what it conceals. Or, to borrow a phrase from
sociologist Pierre Bourdieu, secrecy can also serve as a form of “symbolic
capital”; that is, a symbolic resource of distinction, honour and status that
comes from possession of rare, highly valued esoteric knowledge.74 Yet, on the
other hand, secrecy can also be a profound liability for a religious group. By
its very exclusivist nature, the practice of secrecy tends to arouse suspicion
among dominant social and political powers, giving rise to all manner of fears:
“Freemasons are running the country”, “the Mau Mau are ready to revolt”, and


 72. Burroughs, Ali’s Smile, 87.
 73. Hubbard, Dianetics 55, 7.
 74. See Urban, “Fair Game”; Bourdieu, “The Forms of Capital”, 241–58.


198
                                                                 the secrets of scientology



so on. And this in turn brings new forms of government surveillance of groups
who choose to keep aspects of their beliefs and practices secret.75
   Scientology is a striking embodiment of both these aspects of secrecy – its
power and its liability. Indeed, the Church soon found itself not just generat-
ing large amounts of income through its confidential advanced tech, but also
quickly enmeshed in a complex war of surveillance, information control and
espionage, both within its own ranks and with numerous government agen-
cies, media outlets and online critics. The result has been an escalating, spi-
ralling feedback loop of secrecy, esoteric knowledge, government scrutiny,
media exposés, counter-espionage, and now all-out information warfare in the
cyber-domain.
   As such, the example of Scientology also has profound implications for the
study of religions today, particularly in our own new age of religious secrecy,
terrorism and government surveillance. As Michael Barkun notes in his study
of secrecy and privacy after 9/11:

      [D]uring periods of social or political tension, religious secrets, real
      or imagined, take on a broader and more sinister importance, for
      they may be seen as evidence that a religious community has unsa-
      vory beliefs or behaviors that it must hide … We entered such a
      period after the September 11, 2001, attacks.76

Today, we face a host of complex questions as to how to deal with secretive
religious groups that might be engaged in subversive, dangerous and/or ille-
gal activities. Do government agencies have a responsibility to use virtually
any and all means at their disposal to monitor secretive groups and protect
the public – including warrantless wiretapping, “sneak and peak searches”,
“enhanced interrogation” techniques, and other aggressive methods that were
previously considered illegal? Or, conversely, are these highly invasive new
measures in fact dangerous erosions of basic civil liberties and rights to pri-
vacy, reflecting what legal scholars David Cole and James Dempsey call a new
“McCarthy-era philosophy”?77 As Barkun asks, moreover, are such new forms
of government surveillance ultimately counter productive, generating more
fear and paranoia, and a “siege mentality”, which leads to even more secrecy
among marginalized religious groups?78
   As such, the critical, historical study of religion and esotericism will prob-
ably have an increasingly vital role to play in the years to come.


 75. Simmel, “The Secret and the Secret Society”, 375; Tefft, The Dialectics of Secret Society
     Power in States. Cf. Chapter 10 of this volume for a discussion of conspiracy theories, in,
     about and as esoteric discourse.
 76. Barkun, “Religion and Secrecy after September 11”, 276.
 77. Cole & Dempsey, Terrorism and the Constitution, 153.
 78. Barkun, “Religion and Secrecy after September 11”, 296.


                                                                                           199
chapter 10

HIDDEN KNOWLEDGE, HIDDEN POWERS
ESOTERICISM AND CONSPIRACY CULTURE

Asbjørn Dyrendal




The relation between esotericism and conspiracy theory takes many forms.
However, the scholarly literature has focused mainly on conspiracy theories
about esoteric societies. This is understandable. Leafing through the literature
of conspiracy culture one may often be struck by the prominence given to eso-
teric societies in these alternative versions of history. Many websites of con-
spiracy theory pay an enormous amount of attention to “occult” groups, some
imaginary, others well known. Seemingly small and powerless societies like
the Ordo Templi Orientis may be presented as the polar opposite. Societies
long defunct according to academic historiography may be presented as driv-
ing forces in history, the crowning example being the Bavarian secret society
Illuminati, theories about which have grown only more expansive since the
order’s demise in the 1780s.1
    Such theories are often viewed as quaint expressions of fundamentalist out-
rage against unorthodox and largely unknown expressions of religion. They
may, however, be related to more than fundamentalisms and become anything
but quaint. Both recently, such as during the Satanism scare, and more dis-
tantly, in the aftermath of the French Revolution,2 conspiratorial versions of
history and society have acquired prominence. In such cases fear and outrage
may reach the level of moral panic. These occasions of collective action have
“mainstreamed” certain theories for a limited period of time, and have sparked
both public and academic interest in conspiracy theories about esoteric soci­
eties. This is why we know so much, relatively speaking, about them.
    Collective action and mainstreaming have been less prominent in a corre-
spondingly less researched phenomenon: varieties of belief in, and use of, con-
spiracy theories in esoteric movements. But if “esotericism” is the construct of


   1. See e.g. Sørensen, Den Store Sammensvergelsen.
   2. E.g. John M. Roberts, The Mythology of the Secret Societies.


200
                                                        hidden knowledge , hidden powers