Many books and thousands of articles have been devoted since the “long
1960s”5 to the question of whether the process of secularization that started in
western Europe in the eighteenth century would inevitably lead to the decline
of religion in Europe or, more generally, in “the West”. Because this is not the
place to review the complex debate about the many different theories of secu-
larization in any detail,6 let me just point out a few general characteristics of
what seems to be a broad scholarly consensus.
   Scholars today usually agree that a general theory of secularization, with
the expectation of an inevitable decline of religion in modern societies, has
been falsified by actual developments in the twentieth century, with a power-
ful appearance of religion in the public sphere since the 1970s. When it comes
to more nuanced variants of the secularization theory, the picture is differ-
ent. The concept of secularization can be divided into many ­subcategories and
phenomena: decreasing participation in activities of the Church; transference
of Church institutions into the domain of the state; constitutional separation
of Church and state; less power of institutionalized religion in modern soci­
eties; and religious indifference. It depends on our focus of analysis whether

   3. Von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge, 7–23. See also Kippenberg et al., Europäische
      Religionsgeschichte.
   4. Von Stuckrad, Locations of Knowledge, 43–64. As a critical response to this approach, see
      Granholm, “Esoteric Currents as Discursive Complexes”. Granholm correctly notes that the
      concept of discourse, even if limited to Michel Foucault’s work, has to be defined more
      concretely. Instead of “esoteric discourse”, Granholm suggests talking of “discourse on the
      esoteric”.
   5. On this notion see Callum G. Brown, The Death of Christian Britain.
   6. On this discussion see Casanova, Public Religions in the Modern World; Herbert, Religion
      and Civil Society, 29–61; Swatos & Olson, The Secularization Debate. See also Kennet
      Granholm’s contribution to the present volume.


                                                                                            227
kocku von stuckrad



we state a process of secularization and whether we diagnose such a process in
all Western countries or only in a few of them.
    Looking at the development of the secularization debate, it seems as if the
very idea of secularization is more explanandum than explanans: Just like
Kennet Granholm in his contribution to the present volume, I am convinced
that the theory of secularization does not really explain the relationship
between religion and modernization; rather, this theory is itself an integral
part of the formation of modern Western identities and narratives.7 In order
to grasp this intricate relationship, it is fruitful to see the “formations of the
secular”8 directly linked to the “formations of the religious” in processes of
religious change. In my terminology, I follow José Casanova who proposes a
“basic analytical distinction between ‘the secular’ as a central modern epis-
temic category, ‘secularization’ as an analytical conceptualization of modern
world-historical processes, and ‘secularism’ as a worldview”.9 Using the con-
cept of secularism in this way, I argue that secularism has not brought the end
of religion but that the cultural dynamics that brought forth secularism also
determined the new place of religion in cultural discourse. In doing so, these
dynamics established the religious in a new framework of meaning. Even in its
more radical form of ideological atheism, secularism has fostered new modes
of religious cultural expression, from deinstitutionalized religion to radical
religious responses to what is perceived as “modernity”.
    In a similar vein, David Herbert notes that the religion–modernity relation
should be framed in another way than what we have learned in secularization
theories. To be sure, modernization “tends to weaken the power of traditional
religious institutions because of the diversification of channels and forms of
communication in modernity”.10 But the mediatization of modern communi-
cation does not necessarily lead to secularization.

      Rather, religion as discourse can become the central medium of
      public communication. And even in cases where religion does not
      become the dominant language of protest … religious discourses
      and practices can still thrive alongside advanced technology, mass
      literacy and urbanization. Thus, in both cases, and to borrow
      Foucault’s … metaphor derived from the French Revolution, cut-
      ting off the head of the king does not destroy power but disperses


   7. As a critical assessment see Bhambra, Rethinking Modernity.
   8. Asad, Formations of the Secular. On Asad’s important contribution to the discussion see
      also Scott & Hirschkind, Powers of the Secular Modern. On the formation of secularism
      see further Charles Taylor, A Secular Age. As most recent contributions to this open debate
      see Butler et al., The Power of Religion in the Public Sphere; Calhoun et al., Rethinking
      Secularism.
   9. Casanova, “The Secular and Secularisms”, 1049.
 10. Herbert, Religion and Civil Society, 58.


228
                                               discursive transfers and reconfigurations



      it more widely through the system. Indeed, it may even intensify
      its disciplinary effects. So with religion, whose modern discursive
      power may even exceed its traditional institutionalized power.11

Regarding religion as discourse is an appropriate way to withstand the diffi-
culties of the secularization theory. The concept of “discourse”, together with
the concepts of “field” and “communication”, provides us with better analytical
tools to study the complex and often dialectical processes of the formation
of religion and the secular in modern societies.12 This is why I prefer talking
of reconfigurations of religious fields of discourse, when it comes to cultural
and political changes since the rise of secularism in the eighteenth century,
rather than addressing these developments as an unstoppable process of
secularization.
   The critique of common secularization theories has not yet led to alterna-
tive models of interpretation that really have gained currency in today’s aca-
demic debate. While some scholars talk of a “return of religion” (assuming that
“religion” had been gone for a while), others use the term “de-secularization”
or “postsecular”13 (assuming that secularization was a fact until recently) or
describe the historical process with yet another vocabulary. It remains to be
seen which theoretical model “after secularization” will gain the upper hand
in the future. In the next section I will present a few considerations that fol-
low from my assumption that “religion” actually has never been away; what we
witness is a reconfiguration of the discursive field of religion. As I will make
clear, this reconfiguration also affects the place of esotericism in contempo-
rary culture.


RECONFIGURATIONS OF THE RELIGIOUS FIELDS OF DISCOURSE:
FOUR PERSPECTIVES

If we consider religion as a constantly changing field of discourse, the dynamics
of which have shaped the place and function of religion in the modern world,
the question that follows is: how can we describe and analyse the reconfigura-
tion of this field during the past three-hundred years? What are the conceptual
tools that help us to operationalize the dynamics of this change? The approach
that I am offering here addresses four “perspectives on religious change” which


 11. Ibid., 58–9.
 12. For my understanding of a discursive study of religion, see von Stuckrad, “Discursive Study
     of Religion” and, more recently, “Reflections on the Limits of Reflection”. This approach can
     easily be combined with an analysis of dispositives, on which see Bührmann & Schneider,
     Vom Diskurs zum Dispositiv; Jäger & Maier, “Theoretical and Methodological Aspects”.
 13. As a recent example see Molendijk et al., Exploring the Postsecular. Again, see also Kennet
     Granholm’s contribution to the present volume.


                                                                                             229
kocku von stuckrad



not only show the ways and modes of discursive transformation but also iden-
tify major cultural areas in which these changes become visible and where we
find our data for such a change. I argue that the European religious landscape
has been redesigned by (i) new forms of communitarization, (ii) the scientifi-
cation of knowledge, (iii) new forms of aesthetic representations and (iv) the
emergence of new public arenas that challenge the religious neutrality of the
state in constitutional democracies. Put into conceptual language, the under-
lying processes can be called communitarization, scientification, aestheticiza-
tion, and public activation. I will discuss these concepts separately and with
reference to the changes of esoteric discourses in particular.


Communitarization