On 1 September 1991, at the age of twenty-six, Shamil Basayev held a
weapon in his hands for the first time.18 Before that day he had led the life of
an average young Chechen man. Born in 1965 in the mountain village Dyshne-
Vedeno, he performed his military duties as a fireman and then travelled
around as a seasonal labourer. In the mid-1980s he moved to Moscow, failed
to enter the State University and went on to study at an agricultural institute.
After having been expelled for absenteeism, he lived hand-to-mouth for some
years, again working on construction sites, trading in computers on the black
market, and doing other odd jobs of a (semi-)criminal nature.19 Having been,
in his own words, “an all-Soviet kid” who “overall … really believed in the com-
munist ideals” he was taught at school and elsewhere, his eyes were opened
under perestroika.20 With the disappearance of Soviet certainties, he later
recalled, among all Soviet people “a lack of spirituality” had begun to make
itself felt.21 Basayev, too, began a search for his identity: “I found myself in the
life of my people, in their aspirations”.22
    And so, on 1 September 1991, at the age of twenty-six, at a protest rally
in support of an illegal Chechen National Congress in Chechnya’s capital,
Grozny, Shamil Basayev carried a weapon for the first time. It might be called
the moment he found his personal legend, began to “walk the Path” and “fight
the Good Fight”, since from that moment on until his death in July 2006 he
unflinchingly followed his own trajectory. In November 1991, when Soviet
Russia introduced martial law in Chechnya, he co-hijacked a Russian airliner,
diverted it to Turkey and demanded that they be allowed to speak to the press
to protest against this move.23 He saw his first combat in 1992 as a volun-
teer in the Georgian–Abkhaz war. He left the next year as the commander of
the tightly knit Chechen Battalion (and, oddly enough, as Abkhazia’s deputy
minister of defence). In the spring of 1994, after briefly gaining further battle
experience in Nagorno-Karabakh, the contested ethnic Armenian enclave in
Azerbaijan, he and a number of his men travelled to Pakistan and Afghanistan
seeking to receive more formal training in an Afghan training camp.24 He
returned to Chechnya in the summer of 1994 to prepare for an increasingly
probable war with Russia. When it came in December that year, Basayev soon
emerged as one of the most important commanders after the chief-of-staff
and later president, Colonel Aslan Maskhadov (1951–2005).

 18. Billingsley, Immortal Fortress.
 19. Lieven, Chechnya, 36; Jagielski, Torens van Steen, 211–15.
 20. Gall & de Waal, Chechnya, 260; Billingsley, Immortal Fortress.
 21. Billingsley, Immortal Fortress.
 22. Ibid.
 23. Dunlop, Russia Confronts Chechnya, 121, 144; Liz Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s ‘Terrorist
     No. 1’”.
 24. Blotsky, “Shamil Basaev”. It might be noted that Al Khaldun, the camp in question, was
     managed and maintained by Pakistan’s powerful intelligence agency, the ISI. Brian Glyn
     Williams, “Shattering The Al-Qaeda–Chechen Myth (Part II)”.


270
                                                    new age spirituality and islamic jihad



   In June 1995 Basayev entered the international stage. Weeks after a
Russian airstrike on the family home of Basayev’s uncle in Vedeno had killed
around a dozen of his close kin, including several children, he gathered a
volunteer force of some 130 to 150 trusted companions, told them to pre-
pare for death and led them on a raid deep into Russia.25 Their progress was
halted in the southern Russian city of Budyonnovsk, where they herded up
to 2000 civilians into a hospital and demanded an end to the war.26 Personally
leading the negotiations with Russia’s Prime Minister Viktor Chernomyrdin,
Basayev managed to obtain a temporary – and very welcome – ceasefire
with Russia, as well as a safe passage out for him and his men, and the ­bodies
of their dead.27 The operation cost between 90 and 150 lives, mostly civil-
ian.28 In August 1996 he led the surprise retaking of Grozny that forced the
Russians to negotiate and sign a peace agreement that halted the war.29 In
August 1999 he ignited another war when he crossed Chechnya’s eastern
border into the Republic of Dagestan with a force of some 1500–2000 muja-
hidin to assist some local Islamist friends who had declared an independ-
ent Islamic state.30 In October 2002 he oversaw the organization of a second
major hostage-taking operation, this time in the Russian capital and without
his direct involvement in the field, to demand an end to the war and ask
for renewed attention to Chechen suffering under Russian brutality; at least
129 of the 700–1000 hostages died when, as part of the rescue operation,


25. For the air raid, see e.g. Bennett, Crying Wolf, 425; Gall & de Waal, Chechnya, 259; Murphy,
    The Wolves of Islam, 20 (neglecting to identify its sources and using the dehumanizing blan-
    ket term “Wolves” to denote all militant Muslim Chechens, this book should be approached
    with caution). See also the film Immortal Fortress. For the estimated number of fighters,
    see e.g. Liz Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s ‘Terrorist No. 1’”; Gall & de Waal, Chechnya, 257;
    Erlanger, “Moscow Accepts Chechnya Talks”; Murphy, The Wolves of Islam, 20; Sebastian
    Smith, Allah’s Mountains, 200.
26. See e.g. Chadayev, “12th Anniversary of Basayev’s Raid on Budyonnovsk”; Erlanger,
    “Russian Soldiers Storm a Hospital Seized by Rebels”; Murphy, The Wolves of Islam, 21; Liz
    Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s ‘Terrorist No. 1’”.
27. Liz Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s ‘Terrorist No. 1’”; Jagielski, Torens van Steen, 228–9;
    Lieven, Chechnya, 124–5; Sebastian Smith, Allah’s Mountains, 202; Specter, “TV Offers a
    Melodrama in Real Time”.
28. See e.g. Erlanger, “Moscow Accepts Chechnya Talks”; Liz Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s
    ‘Terrorist No. 1’”; Jagielski, Torens van Steen, 228; Lieven, Chechnya, 124; Murphy, The
    Wolves of Islam, 21; Sebastian Smith, Allah’s Mountains, 203.
29. Liz Fuller, “The Rise of Russia’s ‘Terrorist No. 1’”; Gall & de Waal, Chechnya, 342; Bennett,
    Crying Wolf, 486; Faurby & Magnusson, “The Battle(s) of Grozny”.
30. See e.g. Akhmadov & Lanskoy, The Chechen Struggle, 151–4; Evangelista, The Chechen
    Wars, 63 (Evangelista states that original reported estimates of the number of involved
    fighters “ranged from some 300 to over 2,000”); Hahn, Russia’s Islamic Threat, 109; Murphy,
    The Wolves of Islam, 93, 98–102. Basayev himself stated in 2005: “There … we sent a for-
    mation of 500 men. And further three separate groups of 150 men” (Babitsky, “Segodna
    Voyuet ves’ Chechensky Narod!”). Assuming that Basayev means that these three groups
    consisted of 150 men each, the total number of fighters was 950.


                                                                                            271
eduard ten houten



Russian special forces pumped gas into the theatre building they were being
held in.31
   Even Basayev’s enemies and those sympathetic to his cause, who nonethe-
less strongly rejected his resort to terrorist tactics, might retain respect for his
fearlessness and skill. Few would in fact have denied that, though (co-)respon-
sible for the deaths of hundreds of unarmed civilians, he was the most daring
and charismatic commander of Chechen resistance to Russia.32 In terms of
fame and charisma, if not necessarily in experience and skill, he easily out-
shone his nearest rival and ally, President Maskhadov, whom he respected as
a man and recognized as president, but to whose authority and opposition to
terrorist tactics he would certainly not always listen.33 Basayev had not only
long repudiated many conventional rules and laws of war, but also developed
a calm and composed determination to walk his narrow, isolated path chin-up
and to let nothing and no one dissuade him from continuing the fight. It was
under these circumstances that he first started reading Coelho’s Manual of the
Warrior of Light.
   If he began at the beginning, he soon came across a very clear indication
that, while the Warrior of Light may be a “warrior”, he should not be thought
of as a warrior like himself, not as the type capable of killing others for what
he believes in. The eleventh passage gives us a single minute glimpse of the
Warrior’s, as it were, daily life when we are told that he “might dance down the