The ironic comments aside, we see that the idea of Egypt as a black African
civilization was at least partly established as a counter-narrative in response to
Gliddon and his colleagues’ projection of a white Egypt.
   Gliddon’s display was of course not the only example where different ideas
conflicted. When pictures of Ramesses II were presented, in a later book by
Gliddon, some compared Ramesses’s facial profile to that of Napoleon, while
others, such as the former slave Frederick Douglass (1818?–95), perceived
a clear resemblance to his own mother.8 The role of the Egyptians took on
clearly political dimensions in the period leading up to the US Civil War
(1861–5), with the question of slavery making racial issues central in political
debate. If Egypt were to become seen as an African civilization, then the argu-
ment that Africa had never created a civilization would be rendered invalid.
That nineteenth-century scholars did as much as they could to promote a
predominantly Middle Eastern or European image of Egypt is taken by con-
temporary Afrocentric writers as evidence for distortions of history in order
to neglect the impact that Africa has had on European civilization, and it is
hard not to agree at least in part. This was the central topic in the first part of
Martin Bernal’s controversial Black Athena (1987). Critics of Bernal claim that
he paints a far too generalized picture of nineteenth-century scholarship on
Egypt, and that he neglects the trend towards anti-Egyptianism among some
more radical European writers. It is, however, difficult to claim that racism
did not play a significant role in creating the image of the ancient world and
Egypt as fair-skinned.9 While the question of racial characteristics is generally
not seen as a significant question among most Egyptologists today, it remains
an issue for both Afrocentrists and white racialist groups. Arthur Kemp’s
March of the Titans (2006), for example, goes to great lengths to show that the
Egyptians were descendants of white people and that black people are inferior.
While the counter-narrative to white Egypt developed slowly and in different
contexts, one area where it found a language to express itself was within the
black Masonic movement.



   7. Ibid., 45.
   8. Ibid., 65–7.
   9. Howe, Afrocentrism, 123.



52
                                                                          inventing africa



PRINCE HALL MASONRY

Masonry has been an important movement in the history of the African
diaspora in North America. It had a large impact on the development of the
constitution of Liberia, and many early black intellectuals were Masons. Prince
Hall Masonry has been particularly influential in this respect. It seems to have
played an important role in creating an early black middle class by stressing
the importance of culture and learning for African Americans.10
   Prince Hall was born in 1735 and lived most of his life in Boston. While we
know some details about his background, sources are scant and there is much
contradiction between descriptions of his early life. One unanswered ques-
tion is if he was born free or a slave. What is known is that in 1770 Hall was a
free black man living in Boston. He spent a lot of energy to improve the lives
of other black people in the city, by founding schools and helping to establish
businesses owned and operated by African Americans, but also by working
politically for the abolition of slavery.
   He came into contact with Masonry during the early 1770s, and while ini-
tial attempts to join the local lodge were unsuccessful due to his race, he and
fourteen other African Americans were initiated into the Grand Lodge of
Ireland on 6 March 1775. Prince Hall later established the African Lodge. It
was not a smooth process, as most Masons did not accept them even after
their initiation, and Hall had to fight for recognition. Originally the group
was only given permission to celebrate St John’s day and bury their dead “in
manner and form”.11 The African Lodge was not officially founded until 1776;
a charter to work a lodge was granted by the Grand Lodge of England only
after the American Revolution, on 29 September 1784, and it was not received
until 29 April 1787. Before this, as early as 1779, the Lodge formed its own
by-laws, or regulations. These regulations were fairly standard, excluding athe-
ists and irreligious libertines, but asking no further questions regarding reli-
gious affiliation. The by-laws document is relevant not only for the history of
Masonry in the US, but also as the first document to describe a form of black
self-government.12
   While the role of Masonry in facilitating black community-building
seems clear, its function as transmitter of counter-narratives to mainstream
white presentations of African history is more debated. According to histor­
ian Wilson Jeremia Moses, Prince Hall Masonry was a fairly standard form
of Masonry based on the myth of the builders of the Temple of Solomon.13


10. Muraskin, Middle-Class Blacks in a White Society; Loretta J. Williams, Black Free­masonry
    and Middle-Class Realities.
11. Gray, Inside Prince Hall, 18.
12. Ibid., 18, 34; Muraskin, Middle-Class Blacks in a White Society, 124.
13. Moses, Afrotopia, 49.



                                                                                          53
fredrik gregorius



Others, like Scott Trafton and Stephen Howe, have argued that it was impor-
tant in transmitting ideas about Egypt, and provided distinctly “Africanized”
interpretations of Masonry.14 The truth is probably somewhere in between.
Most Prince Hall lodges seem to have been fairly traditional, but some
embraced more “Egyptianized” forms. A document that gives evidence to
alternative opinions of Egypt and Africa within Prince Hall Masonry is found
in the writings of the black nationalist leader Martin Robison Delany (1812–
85). In 1853 Delany published a short work called The Origin and Objects of
Ancient Freemasonry. He was concerned with the creation of a strong black
masculine identity and saw Masonry as a means to achieve it. But Masonry
also had a deeper meaning, making Hall’s efforts all the more significant for
him. While steeped in biblical allegories and symbols – Delany was after all a
Christian minister – the text displays a new perspective of history and Africa.
What we find is one of the first examples of an Afrocentric perspective on his-
tory and tradition:

      In the earliest period of the Egyptian and Ethiopian dynasties, the
      institution of Masonry was first established. Discovering a defect
      in the government of man, first suggested an inquiry into his true
      state and condition. Being a people of a high order of intellect,
      and subject to erudite and profound thought, the Egyptians and
      Ethiopians were the first who came to the conclusion that man was
      created in the similitude of God. This, it will be remembered, was
      anterior to the Bible record, because Moses was the recorder of
      the Bible, subsequent to his exodus from Egypt, all his wisdom and
      ability having been acquired there; as a proof of which, the greatest
      recommendation to his fitness for so high and holy an office, and
      the best encomium which that book can possibly bestow upon him
      in testimony of his qualifications as its scriptor, the Bible itself tells
      us that “Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians”.15

Rather than breaking with biblical tradition, Delany inscribed Egypt and
Ethiopia into it, giving Africa a central role as the place where Masonry was
first established. The text was written during a period when conflicts with
other Masonic bodies regarding the legitimacy of Prince Hall Masonry were
common. One of the ways to defend the presence of black Masons was to
claim an African origin for Masonry itself. In doing this, Delany reinterpreted
and broke down the conventional idea of Africa as being devoid of culture.
Thus, if Africans do not have the right to be Masons, then no one does:



 14. Howe, Afrocentrism, 69; Trafton, Egypt Land, 71–3.
 15. Delany, “Origin and Objects of Ancient Freemasonry”, 53.


54
                                                                 inventing africa



      Truly, if the African race has no legitimate claims to Masonry,
      then it is illegitimate to all the rest of mankind. … [T]o Africa is
      the world indebted for its knowledge of the mysteries of Ancient
      Freemasonry. Had Moses or the Israelists never lived in Africa,
      the mysteries of the wise men of the East never would have been
      handed down to us. Was it not Africa that gave birth to Euclid,
      the master geomatrician [sic] of the world? and was it not in con-
      sequence of a twenty five years’ residence in Africa that the great
      Pythagoras was enabled to discover that key problem in geometry
      – the forty seventh problem of Euclid – without which Masonry
      would be incomplete? Must I hesitate to tell the world that, as
      applied to Masonry, the word, Eureka, was first exclaimed in
      Africa? But – there I have revealed the Masonic secret and must
      stop!16

Arguing that Moses had been a Mason served other functions as well. Delany
argues, with Moses as a central example, that even men not born free should
be able to become Masons. Here Delany unites two different strands of
thought; the monumentalist notion of Egypt as the land of Africans, and the
situation of Africans in the diaspora interpreted in the context of the biblical
Exodus-narrative and the captivity of Moses and the Israelites in Egypt.