To understand why these changes in the perception of the astral are signifi-
cant, it is useful to briefly trace the philosophical and practical history of the
astral and its connection to evolving notions of the self. The idea of an astral
plane as a distinct realm emerged during the late nineteenth century. It was
made possible by a convergence of concepts about the cosmos and notions of
the self and its relationship to the body. In particular it was the closing of the
divide between this world and the next, and the emergence of the bifurcated
self, a notion of the self understood as being separable from the body. Notions
of other worlds have existed from ancient times. Platonic and Neoplatonic
ideas posited various dualistic cosmologies where the material body was a
lesser copy or emanation of the soul just as the material world was a lesser ver-
sion of the transcendent. A recurring concern of these thinkers was that the
body could somehow injure the soul. In turn, salvation depended on disciplin-
ing and refining the body, making it a proper vehicle for the soul.6 Underlying
all these cosmologies was the notion that there was a distant source, the place
where the soul originated, that was separate, ­different, and generally supe-
rior to the material world. With the emergence of Christianity, a new under-
standing of the relationship between the body and soul developed as did man’s
relationship to the transcendent. A “productive tension between immanence
and transcendence” arose where various communities manifested this tension
in their personal and communal practices.7 Christianity’s history includes a
number of theologians, such as Augustine and Paul, who wrestled with the
way the soul related to the body, building on the previous Graeco-Roman ideas
and incorporating new understandings of the soul–body relationship. Implicit
in these debates was the relationship of this world with the next. What was the


   6. Vásquez, More than Belief, 24. Modern, usually psychological notions of the self as being
      distinct from the soul, which is associated with theological claims, are not reflected in the
      distant past. Thus in this section there is a necessary ambiguity and interchangeability
      between the terms “soul” and “self ”.
   7. Ibid., 29.


                                                                                              161
john l . crow



role of Christ? How was salvation attained? What part of the self was immor-
tal and what was not? Where did the immortal part of the person go when it
left this world?
   During the Middle Ages the soul was fully integrated with the body, “bound
to sensations, emotions, reasoning and identity”.8 Not surprisingly, it was at
this time that the supernatural was often claimed to be penetrating this world,
manifesting angels, miracles, demons and devils. As Europe emerged out of
the Middle Ages, philosophical and theological distinctions binding the soul to
the body were weakened. Concordant with this separating of the body and soul
was the view that the natural world allowed direct access to the transcendent.
By the sixteenth century figures such as John Dee (1527–c. 1609) and Edward
Kelly (1555–97) used a crystal ball, prayers and magic to contact angels in
higher realms, bridging the divide between this world and the other, and
making it experienceable, in part, while remaining physically embodied.9 In
the eighteenth century, Emmanuel Swedenborg (1688–1772) claimed to have
repeatedly travelled to other worlds through visions, and described the inhab-
itants and scenery in naturalistic language. Connected to Swedenborgianism,10
modern Spiritualism emerged in the mid-nineteenth century, in which medi-
ums claimed the ability to contact the dead lingering on “the other side”. The
barriers and distance between the other world and this world had minimized
so much that the two were nearly identical. According to the mediums, the self
on the other side looked exactly like the physical body, often carrying with it
race, gender and age.11 Whereas in Graeco-Roman cosmologies the body was
a lesser copy of the soul, by the nineteenth century this had become inverted
and the soul in the next world resembled its body in this world.
   Despite the brevity of the previous chronology, the most important aspect
to the history of the astral plane is how, over time, otherworldliness became
completely accessible while embodied and how its nature changed to resem-
ble the material world. By the end of the nineteenth century, occultists like
Leadbeater could assert that the astral plane is an “absolute reality” and that
“the objects and inhabitants of the astral plane are real in exactly the same
way as our bodies”.12 However, this was not the only way the astral plane
was understood. For members of the Golden Dawn, for example, it existed
symbolically, structured according to elaborate systems of correspondences.

   8. Ibid., 31.
   9. For an overview of the activity of John Dee and Edward Kelley, see Harkness, John Dee’s
      Conversations with Angels.
 10. J. Arthur Hill, Spiritualism, 228.
 11. McGarry, Ghosts of Futures Past, 66–93. McGarry documents how Spiritualist mediums
      saw Native Americans in the other world as retaining their race and cultural roles, to the
      point where they described the hunting and gathering practices of Indians in the other
      world, and the need to convert them and civilize them, also projecting Euro-American
      colonial aspirations.
 12. Leadbeater, The Astral Plane, 3.


162
                                        accessing the astral with a monitor and mouse



Nevertheless, they, like the clairvoyants in the Theosophical Society and the
Spiritualist mediums, all saw the astral as closely connected to the material
word; a place that could be entered through a variety of techniques whereby
they would individually leave this world, temporarily leaving behind material-
ity and their bodies.
   To leave the physical body behind and enter another world required a cer-
tain conceptual understanding of the self. Throughout history humanity has
come to understand the self in a variety of ways. Significant for our under-
standing of the astral plane was the sense of self that emerged from Cartesian
dualism. The sense of self coming out of Christianity, especially Pauline
Christianity, is one in which the self is internal and personal. This changed
with the philosophy of René Descartes (1596–1650), which identified the
mind with consciousness and self-awareness. Mind was then placed in contra­
distinction to the body (and, in particular, to the brain). Manuel Vásquez
writes that Paul’s

        elevation of inner faith and spirituality as signs of the authen-
        tic selfhood will interact with Greco-Roman anti-materialist ten-
        dencies, feeding into Western thought via Agustine, who, in turn,
        inspired Descartes’s less ambivalent mind-versus-body and spirit-
        versus-matter dualisms.13

This resulted in a dualism whereby the individual’s sense of self, one’s “con-
sciousness”, was understood to be distinctly separate from the body in which it
resided. “That the thinking thing is not only different from the extra-world and
the body, but that it is autonomous, that it does not need material reality to
exist.”14 Within esoteric traditions, Cartesianism combined with already exist-
ing esoteric models of the self. As mentioned before, Neoplatonic ideas under-
stood the physical body as separate from the soul. Bridging this divide is what
Wouter Hanegraaff describes as “subtle bodies”.15 These subtle bodies, their
divisions, enumeration and constitution differ from tradition to tradition,
but are often found mediating or constituting parts of a person. For instance
many Jewish Kabbalists understood the soul to be divided into four parts
that, when combined, formed the whole person. Historian Julie Hall traces
numerous threads, including Neoplatonism, Egyptian cosmologies, Kabbalah,
Paracelsianism, Spiritualism, and more that contributed to the synthesis
which manifested in Theosophical understandings of the self and world.16 This
evocative amalgam of esoteric representation of the self and its relationship
to the body and the world combined with nineteenth-century notions of the

 13.   Vásquez, More than Belief, 29.
 14.   Ibid., 38.
 15.   Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 221–3.
 16.   Hall, “The Saptaparna”, 11–24.


                                                                                 163
john l . crow



self which was connected to the spiritual and emotional, creating a “true” or
“authentic” self.17 This spiritual self was seen as able to directly connect with
the transcendent. The result was the creation of a double-self, or simply “the
double” as it was frequently called in Theosophical circles, which caused indi-
viduals to identify the self as both mind (subject) and body (object) simulta-
neously. As John Corrigan notes, “[t]he irresistible logic of each of the two
compelling views of the self – a spiritual and emotional subject as opposed
to embodied, mechanical object – in the end required that the self be both”.18
Thus the notion of the double-self combined with a view of the other world as
accessible in this world while still possessing a body allowed occultists of the
nineteenth century to imaginatively leave their physical bodies behind. In this
way they could travel in an astral environment that was similar to the material
world, but also transcend the limits imposed by materiality and the body.


THE TECHNIQUES, EMBODIMENT AND PHYSICAL STATES OF ASTRAL TRAVEL