Representing “the esoteric” and “the occult” as something of a self-­contained
and coherent tradition or a cluster of such has been a standard staple of older
scholarly and semi-scholarly research. Frances Yates’s notion of “the Hermetic
tradition” popularized such a view concerning Hermetic philosophy in the
Renaissance, but it also legitimized a broader idea of a coherent oppositional
intellectual and religious tradition in Europe – especially after being read and
interpreted by counterculturalists of the late 1960s who used it to support
their contemporary agendas.46 The notion of an apparently stable “tradition”
has also been prominent in some works by sociologists, who may additionally
have been in a worse position to stay informed about the historical complexi-
ties of the matter.47
   However, the idea of a self-contained “esoteric tradition” seems to be a spe-
cial case of construction of tradition that took shape especially in the con-
text of nineteenth-century occultism. In the wake of the Enlightenment and
the French Revolution, and during the onset of industrialization, the pro-
fessionalization and expansion of the modern sciences, and amidst nation
building, imperial competition, and the development of new radical politi-
cal programmes across Europe, yet another inversion and use of the “ancient
wisdom narratives” was created. With the Enlightenment “history of error”

 43. See e.g. McIntosh, The Rose Cross and the Age of Reason; Bogdan, Western Esotericism and
     Rituals of Initiation.
 44. See e.g. Bogdan, “The Sociology of the Construct of Tradition and Import of Legitimacy in
     Freemasonry”; Asprem, Arguing with Angels, chapter 3; cf. von Stuckrad, “Secrecy as Social
     Capital”.
 45. Cf. Webb, The Occult Underground; Webb, The Occult Establishment. Connections
     between esoteric historiographies and wisdom narratives on the one side, and polemical
     “countercultural” constructions and rejections of modern society on the other, are explored
     in several chapters in the present volume (see especially Chapters 10 and 12).
 46. See Frances Yates, Giordano Bruno and The Hermetic Tradition; cf. Hanegraaff, “Beyond
     the Yates Paradigm”.
 47. See for example the numerous mentions of “the esoteric tradition” in Tiryakian, “Prelim­
     inary Considerations”.


36
                                                                   constructing esotericisms



already in place, “occultist” authors found a blueprint of rejected and oppo-
sitional knowledge dealing somehow with religion as well as philosophy and
science, which provided the raw materials for inventing a new “tradition” or
“lineage” from which to base one’s often quite ­ambiguous opposition to con-
temporary affairs. This led to the formation of modern occultism, where one
of the first and most influential tradition-builders was Eliphas Lévi (Alphonse
Louis Constant, 1810–75). It is significant that it was in this context that the
noun “esotericism” started to get popularized for the first time, typically refer-
ring to a perennial tradition connected with Hermeticism, alchemy, astrology,
magic, and so on, but above all with the Kabbalah, conceived of as a time-
less, perennial system of wisdom.48 This notion continued to gain currency
in British occultism, as it emerged in its institutionalized forms through soci­
eties such as the Hermetic Society and the Theosophical Society, and esoteric
orders of initiation such as the Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn. More
influential on scholarly circles was Lévi’s English translator, the occultist and
autodidact scholar of magic, alchemy, Rosicrucianism, Kabbalah and mysti-
cism, Arthur Edward Waite (1857–1942). Waite’s notion of “the secret tradi-
tion” encompassed all said topics, but was above all intrinsically connected to
his personal brand of Christian mysticism. The “secret tradition” was thus, for
him, not necessarily constrained by any direct historical continuity of think-
ers, authors, texts, or even secret societies, but rather by an “invisible commu-
nity” of those who had achieved exalted mystical insights.49
    While most current scholarship on Western esotericism strongly criticizes
the idea of a coherent “esoteric tradition”50 as being the result of emic his-
toriography, one commonly comes across this view among non-specialists.51
It should also be noted that it has not altogether disappeared from special-
ist literature either. For example, Nicholas Goodrick-Clarke’s introduction to
Western esotericism refers to esoteric traditions in the plural, but betrays a far
more essentialist position in claiming that the


 48. See e.g. Lévi’s Dogme et Rituel de la Haute Magie and Histoire de la Magie, both included
     in the combined edition Secrets de la Magie. Cf. Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy,
     chapter 3. For the role of a reinterpreted Kabbalah as providing both tradition and innova-
     tion, see Asprem, “Kabbalah Recreata”. For recent philological and genealogical studies of
     the term esotericism, see especially Neugebauer-Wölk, “Der Esoteriker und die Esoterik”;
     Hanegraaff, “The Birth of Esotericism from the Spirit of Protestantism”.
 49. On Waite, see Robert A. Gilbert, A. E. Waite. Cf. his autobiography, Waite, Shadows of Life
     and Thought.
 50. See e.g. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”.
 51. See e.g. the highly problematic recent work by David S. Katz, The Occult Tradition. Katz
     believes that “the occult tradition” is something really “out there”, and tries to trace “it”
     through Western history. Defined in terms of “the readiness to relate the unrelated”, and
     by a belief in the supernatural, his main objective is, bizarrely, to show how contemporary
     American Fundamentalism is connected to “the occult tradition” (which is sometimes also
     interchangeably denoted “esoteric” and “mystical”).


                                                                                              37
egil asprem and kennet granholm



       perennial characteristics of the esoteric worldview suggest … that
       this is an enduring tradition which, though subject to some degree
       of social legitimacy and cultural coloration, actually reflects an
       autonomous and essential aspect of the relationship between the
       mind and the cosmos.52

While (however reluctantly) accepting that socio-cultural context may have
some marginal relevance, Goodrick-Clarke actually conceives esotericism
“as such” in terms closer to the ahistorical notions of a universal philosophia
perennis; “definitions of ‘the esoteric‘ in terms of discourse, social construc-
tions, and legitimacy” are all found wanting by Goodrick-Clarke because they
“lack a hermeneutic interpretation of spirit and spirituality as an independent
ontological reality”.53 Whether conceived of in perennialist form, or as a mere
self-supported historical tradition (including reworked notions of prisca theo-
logia), the notion of “the occult tradition” is, in fact, where emic and etic his-
toriography often meet.54 When recognizing that many pioneers in the field,
especially among those which Hanegraaff has termed the “generalists” in the
study of esotericism,55 have had their scholarly interest sparked by personal
esoteric convictions, this is perhaps not so surprising.56 It is problematic, how-
ever, if and when religious convictions strongly inform and filter scholarship.
In the following section, we shall highlight the tradition-forming functions
that easily follow certain types of scholarship.


SCHOLARS INVENTING TRADITION: THE EXAMPLE OF SHAMANISM

Moving to a more focused case study of the construction of tradition, the
convoluted story of shamanism is one of the more interesting ones to assess.
The construction of shamanism demonstrates the influence and confluence
of a multiplex of different actors – ranging from nineteenth-century national
romantics, through twentieth-century scholars, to esoteric ­practitioners
today. Naturally, then, it is impossible to provide anything in the way of a
thorough discussion in this context. For this we refer to the many volumes


 52. Goodrick-Clarke, The Western Esoteric Traditions, 13 (emphasis added).
 53. Ibid., 12. Italics added.
 54. A good example of this is Holman, The Return of the Perennial Philosophy, which has the
     subtitle The Supreme Wisdom of Western Esotericism. The book strives to be something
     in the sort of a scholarly examination (but fails miserably), and the inclusion of “Western
     Esotericism” in the subtitle can probably be attributed to intentions of aligning it to the aca-
     demic field of the same name. The impact of scholarship on esotericism is discussed further
     on in this chapter.
 55. Hanegraaff, “Beyond the Yates Paradigm”, 24–5.
 56. See for example the importance of the Eranos circle on the early scholarship of Antione
     Faivre: Hanegraaff, Esotericism and the Academy, chapter 4.


38
                                                                 constructing esotericisms