Scientologists’ progress, the “Bridge to Total Freedom”, lists fifteen OT levels,
only seven or eight of these appear to have been completed before Hubbard’s
death, or at least are currently available to Church members.
     Since they were first released in the late 1960s and early 1970s, the OT
­levels have been surrounded by an intense and tantalizing aura of secrecy.
 Those moving through the OT levels must carry the materials in locked brief-
 cases and are instructed to keep them in secure locations. They are forbidden
 to discuss any aspect of the materials with anyone, including family mem-
 bers.35 As the Church’s official website explains, the advanced technology
 of the OT levels must be “strictly confidential”; because the individual must
 “meet the highest ethical standards and have completed earlier levels of spir-
 itual release” before even being allowed to see them.36 However, it also seems
 clear that the advanced technology materials of the OT grades also play the
 role of “adorning possessions” in Simmel’s sense – that is, as sources of pres-
 tige and honour that enhance the individual’s status precisely by virtue of
 what they conceal.
     The most infamous of the OT materials is the narrative revealed at OT level
 III, which explains the past history of the physical universe and the source of
 human suffering in this life (this was the narrative that was also viciously ridi-
 culed in an episode of the cartoon South Park in 200537). The contents of OT
 III are surrounded with a profound aura of mystery and power. According to
 Hubbard’s audio journal of 1967, this level is “so occluded that if anyone tried
 to penetrate it … they have died”.38 Yet Hubbard risked his own life and health
 in order to achieve the dramatic breakthrough to OT III, passing through the
 “Wall of Fire” to uncover the secret history of our galaxy and the means to
 recover our ultimate potential as spiritual beings:

        Here are contained the secrets of a disaster which resulted in the
        decay of life as we know it in this sector of the galaxy. The end
        result of OT III is truly the stuff of which dreams are spun: The
        return of full self-determinism and complete freedom.39

Although the details of OT III are only available to qualified Scientologists, the
text of these materials was made public through two court cases and has since
circulated widely in print and online. Essentially, this complex narrative tells
the story of the intergalactic Emperor Xenu (or Xemu in some versions) who
ruled 75 million years ago and tried to solve the problem of over-­population by
gathering individuals onto planet Earth (then called Teegeeack) and ­planting


 35.   Reitman, “Inside Scientology”.
 36.   Religious Technology Center, “Protecting the Advanced Technology”.
 37.   South Park, “Trapped in the Closet”.
 38.   Hubbard, Ron’s Journal 67, 2.
 39.   Hubbard, Have You Lived Before This Life?, 307.


                                                                                      189
hugh b . urban



hydrogen bombs in the Earth’s volcanoes. The beings were blown up, but their
thetans or spirits survived in a confused state and eventually adhered to mod-
ern humans like spiritual barnacles. These “extra-body thetans” that adhere to
each one of us are a chief cause of the ignorance and suffering that we experi-
ence in this life. Advanced auditing therefore requires clearing and removing
these extra-body thetans.40
    But beyond their secrecy and complex metaphysical content – which really
is not particularly remarkable when compared with other esoteric traditions
– perhaps the most controversial aspect of the OT levels is simply their cost.
According to price lists from 2009, the OT levels range from $2800 to $8400,
which is on top of the thousands of dollars required to reach the preliminary
state of Clear and the preparatory training required to begin the OT levels,
not to mention the various additional costs such as books, videos, the latest
E-meter41 ($4600) and the cost of staying at facilities offering the OT courses,
such as the Fort Harrison Hotel in Clearwater, Florida (rooms ran­ging from
$150 to $15,000 a night). As such, conservative estimates suggest that a Scient­
ologist hoping to reach Clear would spend a minimum of $128,000, while
those attaining level OT VIII would invest a minimum of somewhere between
$300,000 and $400,000 in the Church of Scientology.42
    In part because of its growing wealth and influence, Scientology came
under increasing (and often aggressive) scrutiny by various branches of the
US government in the 1960s and 1970s. As early as 1963, the Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) had begun to investigate the Church of Scientology, and
finally raided its centre in Washington, DC, on the grounds that Scientology
was making false claims about the benefits of its counselling device, the
E-meter. Moving in with unmarked vans, a squad of FDA agents and US
marshals confiscated more than three tonnes of materials, books, paper and
E-meters.43 In 1967, the IRS also began to investigate Scientology, stripping
it of its tax-exempt status and claiming that it owed several million dollars in
unpaid taxes. This in turn launched a massive legal war between the IRS and
the Church that involved literally thousands of lawsuits and dragged on until
the Church’s victory in 1993.44
    In response to this increasingly aggressive government surveillance, Scient­
ology began to undertake its own elaborate tactics of counter-­espionage and
covert operations that almost rivalled those of the FBI. Indeed, in its obses-
sion with secrecy and information control, Scientology was almost a kind of


 40. See Urban, The Church of Scientology, chapter 3; Rothstein, “‘His name was Xenu. He Used
     Renegades …’”.
 41. The E-meter (or Electro-psychometer) is a kind of skin galvanometer that operates some-
     what like a lie-detector.
 42. Behar, “The Thriving Cult of Greed”; Urban, The Church of Scientology, chapter 4.
 43. Miller, Bare-Faced Messiah, 247.
 44. See Urban, “Fair Game”.


190
                                                                   the secrets of scientology



strange mirror image of the FBI itself. More than one critic has noted that “the
FBI was quite as paranoid about Hubbard as Hubbard was about the FBI”.45 Or
as Ted Gunderson, the former head of the FBI’s Los Angeles office, put it, “the
Church has one of the most effective intelligence agencies in the US, rivalling
even that of the FBI”.46 Formed in 1966 under the directorship of Hubbard’s
wife, Mary Sue, this agency became known as the Guardian’s Office (GO) and
operated in a variety of intelligence capacities until 1983 (currently, a new
agency operates under the title of the Office of Special Affairs).
   In the late 1960s, in order to respond in kind to his political and journalis-
tic enemies, Hubbard also introduced an aggressive principle known as “fair
game”. Someone who was labelled fair game was an individual identified as
a threat to the Church of Scientology, and who could therefore be harassed,
threatened or punished using any and all means possible – indeed, “tricked,
sued or lied to or destroyed”.47 At the same time, Hubbard also began using a
process known as “Security Checks” on members of the Church itself in order
to weed out any potential subversives within the organization. Members were
hooked up to the E-meter and asked a series of sensitive questions about their
loyalty to the Church, any secrets they might be keeping, and any possible
connections they might have to Communism:

      Are you a pervert?
      Are you guilty of any major crimes in this lifetime?
      Are you or have you ever been a Communist?48

      Do you have a secret you are afraid I’ll find out?
      Do you collect sexual objects? …
      Have you ever had any unkind thoughts about L. Ron Hubbard or
      Scientology? …
      Are you upset by this security check? 49

      Do you hope you won’t be found out?
      Do you think there is anything wrong with having your own pri-
      vacy invaded?50


 45. Miller, Bare-Faced Messiah, 198. See also Raine, “Surveillance in a New Religious Move­
     ment”, 63–94.
 46. Behar, “The Thriving Cult of Greed”. It is worth noting that Gunderson gained a reputation
     as something of an occult conspiracy theorist in the years after he retired from the FBI. He
     publicly claimed that several high-profile deaths were caused by satanic cults, often alleging
     that high-level government officials were involved.
 47. Hubbard, “Penalties for Lower Conditions”.
 48. Hubbard, “HGC Pre-Processing Security Check”.
 49. Hubbard, “The Only Valid Security Check”.
 50. Hubbard, “Auditor’s Security Check”. See Wallis, The Road to Total Freedom, 149; Urban,
     “Fair Game”; Raine, “Surveillance in a New Religious Movement”.


                                                                                              191
hugh b . urban