that have been produced on the various topics and themes converging here.57
Instead, we will venture on a short discussion, focused both on the role played
by esoteric discourse in the construction of shamanism and the influence later
asserted back on esoteric discourse – thus demonstrating how esoteric dis-
course is interweaved with other social and cultural factors and trends.
   We will start with the fervour of national romanticism in the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries, and turn the gaze to Finland. This par-
ticular country is a good starting point as it is here that we can discern some
of the first steps in projecting shamanism as a “universal and ancient” reli-
gious technique, and where we still to this very day find scholars engaged in
this project.58 First a few words on Romanticism. This period or movement,
particularly strong in its German variant from the late eighteenth century but
spreading through Europe like wildfire, was in many ways a backlash to the
Enlightenment and its ideals. Where the latter emphasized things like (“mod-
ern”) scientific rationality, civilization and universality, Romantics instead val-
ued the mystical, natural/organic and particular.59 It is in this process that we
see the birth of the nation state – i.e. the invention of nationalist traditions, as
emphasized by Hobsbawm – with Germany again in the forefront. Here, the
idea of the Völksgeist – a “folk spirit” uniting all people of a particular heritage
and binding them together in the nation – was first articulated. In this context
we also find the “first wave” of Germanic neopaganism – as a “folk-oriented”
religiosity to replace universalistic Christianity – as well as examples of the
racialism that would later find violent political expression in the regime of the
National Socialist Party in the 1930s.60
   This is where we turn to Finland. This country, having been a province of
Sweden until 1809 when it became an autonomous Grand Duchy of Tsarist
Russia, was caught up in the national romantic winds just like other European
countries. In Finland, language politics were intimately tied to nationalist con-
cerns. Swedish had been the language of the educated and the ruling class
while under the governance of Sweden, and this continued to be the case
under Russia. From the 1820s onwards, the Fennoman movement – with
the goal of adopting Finnish as the official, main (and often only) language of
Finland – was born, and it gained strength in the subsequent decades. Many
in the earlier Swedish-speaking privileged classes adopted Finnish – which up

 57. For discussions on the scholarly construction of shamanism, see e.g. Svanberg, Scham­
     antropologi; von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und Esoterik; Znamenski, The Beauty of the
     Primitive. For the role of Eliade and the Eranos meetings, see e.g. Wasserstrom, Religion
     After Religion.
 58. Notable examples are Juha Pentikäinen (1940–), emeritus professor in comparative religion
     at Helsinki University, and Anna-Leena Siikala (1943–), emeritus professor in folkloristics
     at the same university.
 59. Hanegraaff, New Age Religion and Western Culture, 419.
 60. See Gardell, Gods of the Blood, 20–22; Gregorius, Modern Asatro, 55–64; cf. Granholm,
     “‘Sons of Northern Darkness’”; Granholm, “Esoteric Currents as Discursive Complexes”.


                                                                                             39
egil asprem and kennet granholm



until then had been the language of peasants – as their language of choice, and
even changed their surnames to appear more Finnish, often by direct transla-
tion (e.g. Juho Kusti Paasikivi, president of Finland from 1946 to 1956, was
Christened Johan Gustaf Hellstén).61 In this process of forging a national cul-
ture and identity legitimacy was needed, and thus the study of Finnish folklore
was born. Vast numbers of promising young scholars, both university edu-
cated and amateurs, ventured out to the Finnish countryside to collect folk
tales – remnants of “authentic and original” Finnish culture, it was claimed.
Part of this project of Finlandizing Finland was the creation of the Finnish
national epic, the Kalevala, by Elias Lönnrot (1802–84) in the mid-1800s (the
“old” Kalevala in 1835–6, and the extended “new” Kalevala in 1849); not as an
authentic example of collected tales, but as a conglomerate of folk tales and
the embellishments and innovations of Lönnrot, all in order to create an epic
in the image of its classic Greek counterparts.62
   Soon, Finnish folklorists ventured out to seek “the roots” of the Finnish
folk, and it is here we come across some of the first (semi-)professional eth-
nography that would lay the foundation of the study of shamanism – as well
as the creation of that particular subject. Matias Aleksanteri Castren (1813–
53), who “actively moulded Finnish cultural nationalism”,63 was one of the first
in this regard. He wanted to prove the antiquity of Finnish culture and find
the original homeland of the Finnish folk, and for this effect he did ethnogra-
phy in Siberia. His book Vorlesungen über die Finnische Mythologie, published
in 1853, inspired later influential authors such as Mircea Eliade and Joseph
Campbell. Several other Finnish ethnographers followed in Castren’s foot-
steps in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. These included the
father of Finnish comparative religion, Uno Harva-Holmberg (1882–1949),
who explored “cross-culturally Eurasian shamanism as a universal Finno-
Ugric-Altaic system”.64
   The popularization of shamanism in the public consciousness can be attrib-
uted to two authors in particular: Carlos Castaneda and Mircea Eliade.65
Castaneda was studying anthropology at University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA) from 1959, and wrote a term paper focused on the use of the Datura


 61. In 1906, 24,800 people were reported to have “Finlandized” their names. This paled to later
     developments, though, as more than 100,000 people changed their names in the years
     1935–6 alone. Thilman, “Suvuista ja nimistä”.
 62. Similar folkloristic programmes existed all over Europe at the time, strongly connected
     with nationalist creations of identity. The folk tales collected by Jacob and Wilhelm Grimm
     in Germany, Peter Christian Asbjørnsen and Jørgen Moe’s collection and publication of
     Norske Folkeeventyr (Norwegian Fairytales) in the 1840s can be viewed this way, as might
     the “Celtic revival” in Britain somewhat later, not to mention the national romantic furore
     over the spoof “Scots Gaelic” poems in James Macpherson’s Ossian.
 63. Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, 28.
 64. Ibid., 32.
 65. Ibid., 165.


40
                                                                  constructing esotericisms



plant in Mexican indigenous religious practices,66 later expanded into an MA
thesis and published in 1968 as The Teachings of Don Juan. In this book, and
a whole series of later ones, Castaneda expounds on his apprenticeship with
the Yaqui Indian Shaman Don Juan Matus, focusing on vivid tales of “entering
another reality”. He was even awarded a PhD degree in 1973 for the third book
in the series, Journey to Ixtlan (1972).67 The books became, and still remain,
hugely popular, launching (neo)shamanism68 as a countercultural trend in the
late 1960s and 1970. However, even in the 1970s critics convincingly argued
that Castaneda’s research was most likely to have been conducted in librar-
ies rather than in the field, and that his “apprenticeship” with “Don Juan” was
probably fictional. Still, Castaneda’s books continue to be influential among
religious practitioners, and even remained examples of ideal ethnography in
anthropological circles for a very long time. Znamenski attributes this to a
changing academic climate in the 1960s, with increasing concerns to “validate
the native’s point of view”.69 Interestingly, Castaneda’s anthropological sup-
porters continued to regard his work as “validating the native’s point of view”70
even though Castaneda never actually presented the views of any natives!
Another interesting example is Michael Harner, who started out as an anthro-
pologist, but moved to be a spokesperson for neoshamanism with his The Way
of the Shaman, published in 1980. His notion of “core shamanism”, the uni-
versal building blocks of shamanism worldwide, is even discussed by Michael
Winkelman in his article on shamanism in the Encyclopedia of Religion, and
included in the bibliography of Mircea Eliade in an article on the same theme
in the volume.71
   It is Mircea Eliade who is of greatest interest when it comes to esoteric
influences in the invention of shamanism as an “archaic and universal tradi-
tion”. Eliade is among the most influential scholars in the history of the study
of religion, and “almost certainly the most familiar name in the field”72 outside
scholarly quarters. In regard to shamanism, he not only popularized it in his
Shamanism: Archaic Techniques of Ecstasy (1964, original French edition in


 66. For a discussion of the use of hallucinogenic substances in esoteric contexts, and the popu-
     larization of the phenomenon, see Chapter 19 of the present volume.
 67. Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, 191, 189–93.
 68. The term neoshamanism is even more problematic than “paganism” or “neopaganism” (for
     a discussion on these terms, see footnote 1 on page 1 of the present volume). If “shaman-
     ism” is itself a construction, then the addition of “neo” to indicate modern reconstructions
     would seem unnecessary. However, the distinction is motivated in distinguishing scholarly
     constructions of pre-modern, non-Western religious “traditions” from modern Western
     reconstructions based on these. That is, we are dealing with second-order constructions
     here.
 69. Znamenski, The Beauty of the Primitive, 195–6, 205–14.
 70. Douglas Sharon, quoted in ibid., 209.
 71. Winkelman, “Shamanism”, 8275–6; Eliade, “Shamanism”, 8274.
 72. Wasserstrom, Religion After Religion, 8.


                                                                                             41
egil asprem and kennet granholm