a “Grand Polemical Narrative”3 we should, perhaps, consider that the polemi-
cal construction of otherness might be reciprocal.4 Their common rejection by
the mainstream may lead those defined as Other by a self-proclaimed ortho-
doxy to define their ties to each other and their emically constructed histori-
cal forebears as close.5 They may also project a similar kind of otherness onto
their preferred opponents, effectively demonizing the mainstream as much as
any discourse of the more powerful.
   That such polemical narratives may take the form of conspiracy theory has
already been considered with regard to some examples from esoteric groups.
The presence of anti-Semitic conspiracy theories in far-right esoteric move-
ments is, for instance, well known.6 Here, however, I will show further exam-
ples of conspiracy theory in esoteric societies, with three largely different
usages; in anthroposophy, Satanism and Discordianism. As we shall see in
these examples, conspiracy theories about secret, esoteric societies crop up
even within the esoteric discourse on conspiracy.
   It should come as no surprise that some “esotericists”, when believing in
conspiracies, may also ground them in esoteric discourse. We should perhaps
try to delve deeper, into the less easily seen. So in order to assuage the thirst
for esoteric knowledge, I shall attempt a tentative answer to a discussion I have
had with one of the editors of the present volume: may conspiracy theories in
themselves qualify for membership in contemporary esoteric discourse in any
useful manner? Does relating them to each other help us understand anything
better?
   In order to delve into this issue, I look next at two examples of conspiracy
discourse written by recognized spokespersons within conspiracy culture. To
assist in the venture of examining whether conspiracy discourse itself is also
usefully considered as esoteric discourse, I will look at the examples through
the lens of three interrelated topics that follow closely on my chosen definitions
of conspiracy theory and esoteric discourse (below): notions of history, agency
and knowledge. The first topic raises questions related to conspiracy theories
as apocalyptic mythologies of evil, and their construction of secret societies in
history. Revealing secret history brings us to the nature of knowledge, how it is
constructed and what its function is in these mythologies. Hidden knowledge
about secret agents who are more effective than those seen, also brings in the
question of agency, and how secret knowledge may make it more powerful.
These topics should, hopefully, be a good starting point for considering con-
spiracy theories both about esoteric movements and in esoteric discourse, and


   3. Hanegraaf, “Forbidden Knowledge”.
   4. E.g. Hammer, “Contested Diviners”. This reciprocity is implied by Hanegraaff and others as
      well, but it is rarely explicitly addressed.
   5. Cf. Barkun, A Culture of Conspiracy.
   6. E.g. Goodrick-Clarke, Black Sun; Barkun, Religion and the Racist Right; Barkun, A Culture
      of Conspiracy.


                                                                                           201
asbjørn dyrendal



a promising set of questions for reflecting on whether considering conspiracy
theory as esoteric discourse is useful.


CONSPIRACY THEORY, CONSPIRACY CULTURE AND ESOTERICISM

Conspiracy theory is, in common parlance, a denigratory label indicating that
a theory about the causes of an event or phenomenon, among other things, (i)
involves a deliberate conspiracy, (ii) is fanciful and (iii) commits glaring errors
of fact and/or reasoning. These connotations are so pervasive that they cannot
be overlooked, so I shall instead make use of them. In this context, “conspiracy
theory” is taken to mean theories involving consciously plotting cabals, theo-
ries that are, in regard to extant knowledge, fanciful, and which make use of
what is, from an academic perspective, specious reasoning, factually unlikely,
or simply wrong. The latter is also an implication of Michael Barkun’s scheme
of classifying conspiracy theories as “stigmatized knowledge”.7 Taken together,
these elements focus on the notion of explicitly intentional agency in conspir-
acy theory, and on the importance of claims to hidden, “esoteric” knowledge
stigmatized by mainstream society’s ”Grand Polemical Narratives” to hide the
truth.
   The consciously plotting cabal mark out what constitutes “conspiracy the-
ory” from a broader family of narratives about hidden forces limiting human
agency and subverting our quest for knowledge. This broader family is what is
usually meant by “conspiracy culture”.8 In this article I subscribe to a narrower
understanding of conspiracy culture to delimit the milieu and discourses sur-
rounding conspiracy theorists understood as “spokespersons”. I only rarely
draw on narratives not involving deliberate conspiracy, and then only as back-
ground or comparison.
   With regard to what may count as esoteric, I take a broad stance influenced
by, among others, Kocku von Stuckrad’s focus on “the esoteric” as discursive
strategy9 and Christopher Partridge’s concept of occulture.10 For the purposes
here, I follow von Stuckrad’s delimitation of esoteric discourse:

         What makes a discourse esoteric is the rhetoric of hidden truth,
         which can be unveiled in a specific way and established contrary to
         other interpretations of the universe and history – often that of the
         institutionalised majority.11



   7.   Barkun, A Culture of Conspiracy.
   8.   E.g. Knight, Conspiracy Culture; Knight, Conspiracy Nation.
   9.   E.g. von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism.
 10.    Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West. See also Chapter 6 of this volume.
 11.    Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.


202
                                                           hidden knowledge , hidden powers



We may note that by including opposition to “the institutionalised majority”,
this way of viewing esoteric discourse foreshadows the possibility that reflected
polemical narratives may be used by those forced into the domain of rejected
knowledge. As Wouter Hanegraaff notes with regard to the mainstream, iden-
tity construction depends on “simultaneously constructing an ‘other’ who rep-
resents whatever we do not want to be”.12 This works the other way around as
well, and demonizing the “other” can strengthen identity when social bonds
are loose.13 When interest in content also overlaps, we may find a broader
occulture in a more sociological sense of “amorphous networks”14 clustering –
at least for a while – around certain ideas. The ideas circulating in, from and to
a broader “alternative” mainstream is what Partridge terms occulture: a “reser-
voir of ideas, beliefs, practices, and symbols”15 related to “arcane and restricted
knowledge”16 from a broad spectrum of sources. Unlike Campbell’s focus on a
monist nature of the mystical religion he termed the cultic milieu, Partridge’s
occulture includes the dualist. The ideas constituting dark occulture, to which
conspiracy theory belongs, are thus a phase of, or subscene within, the broader
“occultic” milieu. As we shall see next, conspiracy thinking is also a far from
uncommon element in esoteric discourse.


CONSPIRACY THEORY AMONG ESOTERIC SPOKESPERSONS

The examples below are drawn from three fairly different representatives of
esoteric discourse, all of which are at least at one order removed from the
right-wing esotericism most often tied to conspiracism: Rudolf Steiner
and anthroposophy; Anton LaVey, founder of the Church of Satan; and the
Discordian movement represented by Principia Discordia and the Illuminatus!
trilogy. They differ: Steiner is an important and recognized representative of
esoteric discourse; LaVey combines “secularized esotericism” with a less rec-
ognized “esotericized secularism”;17 and the Discordian movement is least eas-
ily placed, being perhaps the most unorganized representative of a “chaotic”
stream within neopaganism. Discordianism started as a mock religion, and
became more of a serious joke as it developed in many different directions.18 It
is the branch of chaotic thought where conspiracy theory is most prominent,
albeit in a surprising manner resonating with several others.19

 12.   Hanegraaff, “Trouble with Images”, 109.
 13.   See e.g. Dyrendal, “Sykdomsindustrien”.
 14.   Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 66.
 15.   Ibid., 84.
 16.   Ibid., 69.
 17.   See Petersen, “‘We Demand Bedrock Knowledge’”.
 18.   For a good introduction, see Cusack, Invented Religions.
 19.   Partridge’s chapter in this volume shows that “esoterrorism” and related conceptualizations
       of art closely parallel ideas about agency and the use of conspiracy theory in Discordianism.


                                                                                               203
asbjørn dyrendal



Rudolf Steiner and the materialist “vaccine conspiracy”