discourse on African and African American culture, but its impact is dimin-
ishing due in part to the criticism against it. What is of interest here is how
Afrocentricity stands on the crossroads between academic perspectives and
social ideology, which also includes spiritual values and ideas. Its aim is, after
all, to shift from a European to an African mode of thinking.
    As Africa is not a nation but a continent with a multitude of different tradi-
tions and peoples, defining a common African culture and mindset should be
highly problematic. In order to resolve the problem, Asante creates an ideal
image of African culture. Africa is first and foremost regarded as a cultural
unity, a common feature of most forms of cultural nationalism. The foun-
dation is something he calls the “African Cultural System”, and, just as with
the US movement, we find core values identified as African, such as “unity”.
Spirituality plays a central role for Asante, and like Karenga he is opposed to
the idea of Africans adopting Christianity or Islam as their religion. In con-
trast to many other black nationalists, he spends a lot of time criticizing Islam,
which he regards as a form of Arab nationalism.46 According to Asante, a per-
son’s religion needs to be based on his/her cultural and ethnical background.
For Africans, the choice should thus be some form of indigenous African spir-
ituality rather than reinterpretations of Christianity or Islam adjusted to fit the
needs of black people.
    Asante’s answer is an eclectic mix of religious elements, with a significant
focus on ancient Egypt. He calls the basis of his worldview Njia – “the Way”,
which is similar to Karenga’s Kawaida. Njia takes on ceremonial forms, is
focused on ancestor worship, and furthers an Afrocentric view of the world:

      Njia is the collective expression of the Afrocentric worldview
      which is grounded in the historical experience of African people.
      … The stage was being set for Njia for over 100 years. Each level
      of awareness predictably leads to the manifestation of Njia. Njia
      represents the inspired Afrocentric spirit found in the traditions
      of African-Americans, and the spiritual survival of an African
      essence in America.47

While important in the early writings of Asante, Njia does not seem to have
become as much of a living movement as Asante had hoped for. Still, the basic
idea of building a spiritual tradition based upon African religion has contin-
ued to assert influence.
   Concepts such as “awareness” and “spirit” are of importance in Asante’s
writings. It seems that Asante believes in the possibility to achieve some form
of collective mindset that can be used to uplift the whole black community,


 46. Asante, Afrocentricity, 5–10.
 47. Ibid., 30.


62
                                                                    inventing africa



even those that do not adhere to Afrocentric views. To achieve this, only a
small portion of the black community needs to become Afrocentrist. Rather
than seeking to create a mass movement, Asante’s goal is to create a form of
spiritual elite who will become the spiritual leaders for the rest of the black
community, echoing the ideals of Karenga’s US Organization. He even men-
tions 250,000 Afrocentrists as the precise number necessary to achieve this
transformation.48 Asante embraces ideas about a collective unconscious that
are similar to, even if not directly based upon, Jungian ideas. Conversely,
Asante rejects Du Bois’s theory of a double consciousness as being hostile to
the interests of Africans. Du Bois’s theory, in Asante’s interpretation, indi-
cated that the black person was somehow divided: he had integrated the white
peoples’ view of him as being inferior, and this created a mental state of vic-
timhood that was seen as being counter to the black community’s interests.
Rather than focusing on the impact white culture had had on African peo-
ple, the Afrocentric perspective would focus on how Africans, even in the
diaspora, essentially remained “Africans” and thought in an African manner.49
For Asante it is clear that people of African descent share a common mental-
ity and spirit which makes it possible for them to intuitively feel and respond
to African symbols and feel a connection to civilizations that have long since
disappeared. This is most clearly seen in the example of Egypt.
   Asante is opposed to religions that he regards as requiring submission to
God. His arguments are similar to Karenga’s, but rather than seeing African
religions as containing “spookism”, as Karenga does, Asante claims that
African religions are based on the notion of God being immanent. He uses this
argument in his discussions of religion among the Yoroba and the Egyptians
(which he calls Kem).50 In his programme to transform the situation for black
people by adopting an African perspective of the world, he mentions the pos-
sibilities of a “Neo-Kemetic” outlook:

       What if African people, on the continent and in the Diaspora,
       looked to establish a Neo-Kemetic vision of the world? Would not
       the potential of this revolution be explosive in a positive way for
       creativity in politics, art, culture, science, philosophy, and architec-
       ture? Thus, those African leaders who speak about a renaissance
       of Africa must know that it is impossible without some appeal to a
       classical past.51

While Asante and his colleagues try to remain within the academic field, oth-
ers position themselves more clearly as religious teachers. One example is Ra

48.   Ibid., 68.
49.   Asante, An Afrocentric Manifesto, 157–9.
50.   Asante, Afrocentricity, 67.
51.   Ibid., 11.


                                                                                  63
fredrik gregorius



Un Nefer Amen (born Rogelio Alcides Straughn in Panama, in 1944) and his
Ausar Auset Society, based in Brooklyn, New York, and with chapters around
the world, most of which are in North America. Ausar and Auset are alterna-
tive names for Osiris and Isis, and the teachings of the society are based on
a mixture of traditions that are all claimed to have their origins in Egypt. For
example, the Tree of Life of the Kabbalah is seen as an Egyptian symbol. On
their webpage they describe their background:

      Based on the indigenous traditional African cultures dating from
      the earliest documentable periods (Kamit [ancient Egypt], Indus
      Kush [pre-Aryan Vedantic India], Canaan [Palestine], and Kush
      [Ethiopia]), the classes taught revolve around the oldest religion
      known to mankind – the Ausarian religion of ancient Kamit. The
      Kamitic Tree of Life (Paut Neteru) forms the basis of the cosmog-
      ony (philosophy) of this ancient system. It reunites the traditions of
      the great Black founders of civilization, allowing us to weave their
      knowledge into a spiritually empowering way of life which aims at
      the awakening of the Ausar principle (the Divine Self ) within each
      being.52

The proposed influence of African civilization is broadened, and even India
and China are regarded as being under its influence. It is also clear that the
contemporary Ausar Auset Society considers itself to be based upon the same
religious beliefs found in ancient Egypt, rather than being a modern inven-
tion. The society considers man and God as being linked qualitatively but not
quantitatively: a person has the potential for divine powers, but these are dor-
mant within him until correct spiritual training awakens them. The society
does not embrace the idea of salvation by faith familiar from Christianity, but
rather posits that one must act in accordance with the moral laws of the uni-
verse in order to reach a happy and spiritually fulfilled life. The religious sys-
tem is holistic and incorporates all aspect of life, from diet (Amen promotes
vegetarianism) to relationships (guides for living in Afrocentric relationships
are available). But there are also more esoteric aspects that focus on yoga and
other spiritual techniques. The society adheres to the idea of sacred kingship,
and the King also functions as the High Priest. Amen has been the society’s
leader since its foundation, and he is described as “His Excellency, Shekhem
Ur Shekhem (King) and Ashem Ur Ashemu (High Priest), Ra Un Nefer Amen
1”.53 Almost all of the literature is also written by him.
    Another example of Afrocentricity being used as a foundation for new reli-
gious teachings is provided by Dr Muata A. Ashby, who has published books


 52. Ausar Auset Society, “Florida Study Group”.
 53. Ibid.


64
                                                                 inventing africa



with titles such as Egyptian Yoga (2005), purportedly based upon ancient
Egyptian teachings. Ashby’s system is similar to what could be found in
Germany in the 1920s when some esoteric writers created yoga systems based
on the shape of the runes.54 Ashby sees something similar in Egyptian descrip-
tions of the gods and has created a yoga system based on the body poses of
various deities in Egyptian hieroglyphs.


MAGICAL MELANIN