Keeping this definition in mind, I will focus on the “paranormal” subset of
occulture. Analysing the processes by which paranormal ideas “emerge, are
disseminated, and become influential”, one cannot avoid discussing certain of
those highly educated subcultures which are often seen as agents of seculariza-
tion and disenchantment. Following the traces of central paranormal concepts
and themes, dissecting their discursive formation and tracing their dissemina-
tion, we find that occulture in fact has vital nerve centres inside universities and
academic subcultures. This becomes particularly clear when viewed in a his-
torical perspective, as we shall see. But there is also evidence that certain para­
normal ideas remain part of a vital mode of re-enchantment among what may,
perhaps, be seen as the highly educated echelons of contemporary occulture.
   The rise in the early twenty-first century of an emphatically secularist “new
atheism”, which explicitly associates itself with a vision of science and criti-
cal thinking, may have widened the apparent chasm between educated sub-
cultures and occulture. It is, however, intriguing to note that one of the “four
horsemen of the apocalypse”,12 the neuroscientist Sam Harris, displays a very
ambiguous position when we broaden the scope from classic theistic religion
to the broader spectrum of occultural and “paracultural” re-enchantment. The
author of such contemporary classics of atheism as The End of Faith (2004) and
Letter to a Christian Nation (2006) also holds “mysticism” and “spirituality” to
be compatible in practice with science and rationality, and has even gone so
far as to validate parapsychology as a valuable source of scientific wonder:

      There also seems to be a body of data attesting to the reality of psy-
      chic phenomena, much of which has been ignored by mainstream

 11. Partridge, page 116 of the present volume.
 12. The other three being biologist Richard Dawkins, journalist Christopher Hitchens and phil­
     osopher Daniel Dennett.


                                                                                          333
egil asprem



      science. The dictum that “extraordinary claims require extraordi-
      nary evidence” remains a reasonable guide in these areas, but this
      does not mean that the universe isn’t far stranger than many of us
      suppose.13

While Harris has received severe criticism from fellow atheists, the position
he occupies points towards something highly interesting.14 It seems to sug-
gest that scientism, secularism and atheism intersects in significant ways with
occulture.
   By reviewing the location of the paranormal within broader occulture, this
chapter takes the opportunity to shed light on a number of relevant aspects of
contemporary esotericism. The first of these, as we have hinted already, is to
trace certain discursive transfers between academic and esoteric subcultures,
and assess their importance. In terms of Kocku von Stuckrad’s discursive
approach, described elsewhere in this volume, we are interested in processes
of the scientification of knowledge, as well as the influence of forms of public
activation.15 Second, analysing the formation of a “paranormal” discourse, and
particularly its parapsychological subset, opens up intriguing questions about
processes related to what has been called the “secularization of esotericism”,
the “disenchantment of magic” and the re-enchantment paradigm.16 More to
the point, I will suggest that the development of a parapsychological discourse
in the twentieth century should be placed at the intersection of two parallel
processes: the disenchantment of esoteric discourse on the one hand, and
attempts to re-enchant science on the other. Before delving into these com-
plex questions of interpretation, we should have a closer look at the place of
paranormal beliefs among the educated public.


HOW DISENCHANTED ARE THE EDUCATED ELITES?
SOME SOCIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF “PARANORMAL BELIEF”

What the polls have to say

The religiosity of scientists is sometimes used as a way to gauge the effects
of secularization and disenchantment. Polls typically show that self-reported


 13. Harris, The End of Faith, 41.
 14. For the controversy Harris elicited, see especially Gorenfeld & Harris, “Controversy over
     Sam Harris’s Atheist Views”.
 15. See Chapter 11 of the present volume.
 16. The secularization of esotericism and the disenchantment of magic are theoretical con-
     structs that have been suggested by Wouter J. Hanegraaff. See Hanegraaff, New Age Religion
     and Western Culture, 411–513; Hanegraaff, “How Magic Survived the Disenchantment of
     the World”.


334
                                           psychic enchantments of the educated classes



r­ eligious belief and church attendance is significantly lower among scientists
 than the rest of the population. A recent poll by the Pew Research Center,
 for example, found that whereas 83 per cent of the general American pub-
 lic said they believed in a personal God, only 38 per cent of scientists said
 the same (with another 18 per cent subscribing to “a universal spirit or higher
 power”).17 With another 17 per cent of the scientists professing atheism, and
 11 per cent styling themselves as agnostics – against only 2 per cent for each
 of these categories in the general population – there seem to be at the very
 least something to Berger’s statement on the academic exception to deseculari-
 zation.18 Measured in traditional religious beliefs (pretty much on the model
 of Christian theism), scientists are significantly less “religious” than the rest of
 the population.19
     The belief or disbelief in a theistic God, however, says nothing about re-
 enchantment and occulture. The academically trained may be low on this type
 of religiosity, but not necessarily on “paranormal beliefs”. Judging from other
 available polls, some paranormal beliefs even seem to correspond positively
 with higher education. A Gallup poll conducted in 2001 indicated a general
 increase among the American public in paranormal beliefs since 1990. Among
 the types of belief polled for were ghosts, haunted houses, demonic posses-
 sion, astrology and extraterrestrial visitors, but also typically parapsychological
 phenomena, namely extra-sensory perception (ESP), clairvoyance and telepa-
 thy. Excluding the more problematic category of “psychic or spiritual healing
 or the power of the human mind to heal the body”, ESP was by far the most
 widespread paranormal belief in the American population in 2001, with a total
 of 50 per cent expressing belief, and another 20 per cent saying they were not
 sure (only 27 per cent rejected the possibility of ESP).20 By ­comparison, belief


 17. Pew Research Center, “Scientists and Belief ”.
 18. We can also note that Berger qualified his statement by pointing out that it is particularly
     those with educations in the humanities and social sciences who tend to be more “secular-
     ized”. This too is based on good evidence, as social scientists, particularly psychologists and
     anthropologists, consistently report less religious belief and more explicit rejection of reli-
     gion than their colleagues in the natural sciences. This was one of the strong findings of the
     Carnegie Commission’s important 1969 Survey of American Academics. See Stark et al.,
     “Religion, Science, and Rationality”, 436.
 19. Despite these findings, which are remarkably stable since the first such poll was carried out
     in 1914 by the psychologist James Leuba, certain fierce enemies of the secularization thesis
     have been able to turn these statistics into a case against secularization. This is particularly
     clear with Rodney Stark and his fellow supporters of rational choice theory, who seem to
     argue that the relatively stable 40 per cent of theistic scientists is much higher than what
     secularization theorists should be comfortable with. They also make much out of the fact
     that the “hard sciences” are more religious than the “soft” ones, turning the point into a
     rather tendentious correlation with what is the more “scientific” position. See e.g. Stark et
     al., “Religion, Science, and Rationality”, 436; Stark, “Secularization, RIP”, 264–6.
 20. I have chosen to leave out the data for belief in “psychic or spiritual healing”, due to the
     extremely inclusive way in which this “power” was defined in the poll. Essentially, even the


                                                                                                335
egil asprem