of consciousness to the Self-realized state of holistic union with the cosmos.
Therefore, starting from the bottom of the hierarchy, where one can only per-
ceive the lesser gestalts that are defined by a myriad of abstractions, one can
move upward to perceiving higher gestalts until Self-realization is achieved
and all distinctions melt away in the awareness of the cosmos as one holistic
gestalt. The transformation from the egotistical self to the larger ecospheric
“Self ” (with the capitalized “S” signalling identification with all the contents
of the web of life) is nothing short of a “mystical” union with the totality of
the cosmos.72 Naess coined another neologism for this metaphysical self: the
“ecological self ”.73 The environmental ramifications of this are easy to guess, as
lesser gestalts are linked solely to anthropocentrism and the higher ones are
linked to increasing levels of ecocentrism.
    Defined in terms of an epistemological break with the mechanist reduc-
tionism of Newtonian science, and in particular the “twisted and misused”
notion of ecology or “ecologism”, Naess argued that his ontology rectifies man’s
alienation from the natural world in ways that the scientific uses of ecology
cannot.74 This epistemological break is important as it allows Naess to charac-
terize his ontological framework and the ecosophy derived from it as not only
superior to the dominant scientific paradigm, but as a necessary succession of
it.75 Similar to the strategy employed in Sessions’s historiographical account of
Deep Ecology, Naess’s ecosophy constituted a metaphysic that, unlike scien-
tific empiricism, could prevent total ecospheric destruction. Hence, in addi-
tion to positing a holistic conception of reality, and being an individual path
for merging with the totality of the cosmos, Naess’s claim that gestalt ontology
is superior to science mirrors von Stuckrad’s criteria for esoteric discourse,
which states:

       On the most general level of analysis we can describe esotericism
       as the claim of higher knowledge. Important here is not only the
       content of these systems but the claim to a wisdom that is superior
       to other interpretations of cosmos and history.76


 72. For a longer discussion of what Fons Elders calls the “intimate connection” between Naess’s
     ecosophy and mysticism see Elders, “Arne Naess, A philosopher and a Mystic”, 45–9.
 73. Naess, “Self-Realization”, 226–7.
 74. Naess, Ecology Community and Lifestyle, 39. Naess describes “ecologism” as the “excessive
     universalization or generalization of ecological concepts and theories”. His position against
     ecologism relates to his theory of gestalt ontology insofar as the latter is meant as a correc-
     tive to what he sees as the deficiencies of scientific thought, namely, its inability to catalyse
     change: “Ecology as a science does not ask what kind of society would be the best for main-
     taining a particular ecosystem – that is considered a question for value theory, for politics,
     for ethics. As long as ecologists keep narrowly to their sciences they do not ask such ques-
     tions” (as quoted in Glasser, “On Warwick Fox’s Assessment of Deep Ecology”, 166).
 75. Naess, “Ecosophy and Gestalt Ontology”, 245.
 76. Von Stuckrad, “Western Esotericism”, 88.


                                                                                                 303
joseph christian greer



Underscoring the esoteric truth claim embedded in Naess’s ecosophy is cru-
cial because in presupposing ontological holism and the possibility of attaining
a oneness with it, Ecosophy T provided a basis for similar esoteric truth-
claims to manifest in DE. Going under a handful of names including “wide-
identification”, “deep identification” and, most revealingly, “the intuition of
Deep Ecology”, the non-dualism of Ecosophy T represents a lightning rod for
esoteric elaborations on the esoteric elements of Sessions’s and Naess’s defi-
nitions of Deep Ecology. In fact, the ubiquity of ontological holism in DE theo-
rizing led Warwick Fox to disregard the definitions of Deep Ecology posited
by Naess and Sessions, and assert that Naess’s ecosophy represented, defini-
tively, what was unique about Deep Ecology. On account of its holistic basis,
Fox argued that Deep Ecology would more properly be termed “Transpersonal
Ecology”, which simultaneously raised the ire of Naess and Sessions while
adding another popularized esoteric discourse, specifically Transpersonal
Psychology, to DE.77
    The equation of Deep Ecology to Transpersonal Ecology marks a second
discursive transfer between DE and a popularized esoteric discourse, which
is somewhat similar to the discussion of paradigms though it marks an eso-
teric appropriation of a social science. However, the context of this discursive
transfer is significantly dissimilar in its lasting and profound influence on crit-
ics and supporters. The fact that every analysis that states that Deep Ecology
is esoteric is based on conflating (whether rightfully or not) Naess’s ecosophy
and Deep Ecology signals the extent of this influence. While the discussion
will return to the allegation that Deep Ecology is rooted in Naess’s ecosophy
at the conclusion of this section, it is important to note how Transpersonal
Ecology complicates accounting for the esoteric in DE. In positing an inter-
pretation that violates both Naess’s and Sessions’s ­definitions of Deep Ecology,
Transpersonal Ecology renegotiates how the esoteric elements of Ecosophy T
and Sessions’s definition (which may very well be read as his ecosophy) exist in
DE. While previously distinct, Sessions’s historiography and Naess’s ontology
are brought together in Fox’s interpretation, thereby creating a new reference
point for further conflations and discursive transfers to justify their inclusion
in DE. Stated differently, those in DE who had previously held non-dualistic
beliefs but kept them out of their scholarship on account of Sessions’s and
Naess’s definitions could use Fox’s thesis as a point of departure for develop-
ing more elaborate formulations of Deep Ecology, be they neopagan, Wiccan,
or an amalgamation of esoteric discourses comparable with those going under
the label “Eco-magick”.78

 77. Fox, Toward a Transpersonal Ecology, 197.
 78. Growing from an activist “membership organization” to a decentralized network with
     conferences and a journal, the Dragon Environmental Network is the most salient hub
     for discursive transfers between DE and ritual magic, Kabbalah, rune magic, and Goddess
     Worship to name only a handful of discourses. See Dragon Environmental Network,
     “Eco-Magic”.

304
                                     deep ecology and the study of western esotericism



   Based on a polemic against “shallow ecology”, Naess defined the Deep
Ecology movement in terms of its “willingness to question and to appreciate
the importance of questioning every economic and political policy in public”.79
Clarifying this statement, Naess asserted that the deepness of questioning that
occurs in normative derivation was not “the kind found in graduate philosophy
seminars”, but is instead a “profound ‘existential’ undertaking” that brings indi-
viduals to their most deeply held belief, in the jargon of normative derivation,
their “ultimate norm”. Revisiting von Stuckrad’s description of how esoteric
discourse functions, we see that in addition to the claim on higher knowl-
edge, esoteric discourse also emphasizes the individual experience in which
an agent attains higher knowledge through an extraordinary realization.80 This
is precisely the function normative derivation serves. The underlying assump-
tion behind normative derivation is that as a questioner answers progressively
deeper questions, he or she comes closer to articulating sentiments that would
normally remain obscured or otherwise impossible to access.81 At the deep-
est level of normative derivation, the questioner comes face to face with their
most profound truth, the single norm that orients their ecosophy, and more
importantly, all the decisions regarding his or her life.82 At the level of the ulti-
mate norm, normative derivation shifts from a descriptive exercise to a pro-
scriptive one, thereby leading Naess to claim that what is deep about Deep
Ecology is not simply the level of questioning, but the premises reached and
depth of change that they manifest.83 Essentially, Naess claims that the deeper
the questioning, the deeper the change. The transformative power of this sys-
tem of “mental–phenomenological inquiry” is reflected in Naess’s vision of
Deep Ecology’s aims, which he describes by stating: “The aim of supporters of
the deep ecology movement is not a slight reform of our present society, but
a substantial reorientation of our whole civilization.”84 Indeed, with compre-
hensive societal reorientation as its goal, there is little in DE that matches the
personally transformative power of normative deviation.
   In terms of conclusive findings, Ecosophy T, gestalt ontology, and norma-
tive derivation are all esoteric insofar as they make a claim on higher knowl-
edge and provide access to it; however, there remains one key aspect of
Naess’s definition of Deep Ecology that defies the label “esoteric”: the nature
of all ecosophies in the Deep Ecology movement. Despite regularly writing as
though every member of the Deep Ecology movement has an ecosophy cre-
ated through normative derivation, Naess acknowledges that this simply is not
the case.85 This means that even though normative derivation is esoteric, it

 79.   Naess, “Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement”, 205.
 80.   Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.
 81.   Naess, “Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement”, 207.
 82.   Katz et al., “Introduction”, xi.
 83.   Naess, “Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement”, 209.
 84.   Fox, “Deep Ecology”, 158; Naess, Ecology, Community and Lifestyle, 45.
 85.   Naess, “Deepness of Questions and the Deep Ecology Movement”, 205.

                                                                                  305
joseph christian greer