fiction and documentary. Through film his work is able to expand the poten-
tial audience for his message about these children and their place in our soci-
ety. His films, especially Indigo Evolution, have become an important part of
the ongoing discourse of the Indigos.
   Indigo Child is not the only term used within the Indigo discourse to
describe New Age children that are perceived as somehow “different”, or “spe-
cial”. Meg Blackburn Losey’s book The Children of Now serves as an excellent
example of this trend as it is not in fact about Indigo Children. The Children
of Now is about the children who come after the Indigos. Losey says that
these special children “are not all Indigos!” and that these others “are generally
younger” and “have evolved far beyond the Indigo Children”.60 She explains
that the “Children of Now fall into several distinct categories, and [her]
research has shown that there are overlapping attributes that make it nearly
impossible to pigeonhole these amazing beings into neat little boxes”.61 Her
categories for these new children are the “Crystalline Children”, the “Star Kids”,
the “Earth Angels” and the “Transitional Children”. Unsurprisingly, she has
long checklists for each of these to determine if your child is one of her “chil-
dren of now”. The first of these, the Crystal Children, are obviously derived
conceptually from Tappe’s other “floater” life colour. The other names are the
product of the growing discourse of Indigo Children fuelled by channelling,
angelic communication, aura reading, intuition and personal observation. It
is unclear whether any of these names originate with Losey. The Children of
Now describes new types of children who are similar to the Indigos but with-
out the warrior, violent aspect. They are often highly sensitive and physically
frail, suffering from allergies, ADD, and other difficulties. Losey, in one part of
her book, even expands the typical recasting of problem children to include
those with severe mental or physical disabilities. She describes a subgroup
within her Children of Now, made up from among both the “Crystalline” and
“Children of the Stars”, that she refers to as “Our Beautiful Silent Ones”. She
says that these are

      amazing children who, at a glance, appear to be considerably less
      than perfect, in fact nonfunctional – at least on the outside. But on
      the inside these kids carry beauty that is often overwhelming in its
      message, and heart expanding in its truth.62

These children with severe autism and mental disabilities are seen in a radi-
cally positive and hopeful light. Losey tells us that she “came to the conclusion
that these children are the forerunners of the new evolution of humanity. They


 60. Losey, The Children of Now, 22.
 61. Ibid., 21.
 62. Ibid., 148.


364
                                                                                     the new kids



have moved into nearly pure conscious existence while remaining present in
our physical world, albeit with apparent dysfunction.”63 These children are
often unable to speak but instead “they communicate telepathically and with
ease”.64 Losey’s book contains many more examples of divergence within the
Indigo discourse. Her book is an example of a growing field in the Indigo dis-
course that postulates other groups of special children, often children consid-
ered by medical science to be severely disadvantaged, who actually represent
further steps on humanity’s evolutionary path.
   In reaction to divergence within the Indigo discourse, Carroll and Tober
published a third book entitled The Indigo Children 10 Years Later. The
authors intend the book to advance the Indigo discussion into the realm of
Indigo teenagers and to describe how Indigos fare in school and in the work
force. This is an attempt to respond to media attention, derision for the Indigo
Child movement, and the growing divergence that people like Losey repre-
sent. The authors state that

        if you’ve read any articles on the subject or have seen the television
        specials about this “Indigo explosion,” you might think that Indigo
        Children are special, gifted, superpsychic kids from space with dark
        blue auras who are going to save the world. This particular message
        is wrong on all counts.65

This statement clearly contravenes the writings of other authors, and in my
estimation The Indigo Children 10 Years Later is a direct attempt to regain
control of the Indigo discourse and to direct it along the path envisioned by
its creators. Carroll and Tober are seeking to distance the Indigo discourse
from certain New Age ideas and reaffirm it as a mainstream phenomenon.
The primary blame for the misinformation is not put upon other authors but
rather upon bad coverage in the media. They claim that “the American media
has biased the public toward this entire subject in a way that might take years
to correct – at the expense of the kids”.66 They suggest that niche markets will
treat the subject better and they urge other authors, speakers, or film makers
not to “throw it to the wolves of the mainstream media”.67
   The book seeks to demonstrate how the aforementioned perceptions
about the Indigo Children are wrong. In an interview with Nancy Ann Tappe
they ask her about Indigos and their auras, and come to the conclusion that
Tappe does not see auras and that her synaesthesia is something entirely



 63.   Ibid.
 64.   Ibid., 149.
 65.   Carroll & Tober, The Indigo Children 10 Years Later, 3 (emphasis original).
 66.   Ibid., 5.
 67.   Ibid.


                                                                                             365
daniel kline



unrelated.68 “The colour has nothing to do with auras or being psychic” says
Tappe. Furthermore, Tappe affirms that through her synaesthesia she “is firm
in her statement that there are ‘no new colors’”, meaning that the various new
types described by Losey and many others are all to be subsumed under the
heading of Indigos.69 In the interview, Tappe is asked specifically about Crystal
and Golden Children, and she replies that she doesn’t know anything about
those colours and that she “only sees Indigo”. “Early on”, she says, “I sensed
that there would be two colors, but so far I’ve only seen the one.”70 Carroll and
Tober turn to Tappe as their authority, as both the originator of the idea and as
an authority on what colours exist “according to the definition stemming from
her synesthesia”.71 All this restriction is tempered somewhat by the statement
that they “openly welcome those who have named these children other things
and who have separated themselves from the ‘Indigo’ label”.72
   The rest of the book continues in the vein of their other two books, seek-
ing to legitimize the Indigo Child discourse by having various business, medi-
cal and educational professionals write small pieces about subjects to do with
the Indigo Children and teens. All the professionals clearly emphasize their
degrees and position to promote the idea that they are authorities on the
subject matter. The descriptions of Indigos in the work force are particularly
entertaining as they describe how Indigo teenagers reject the customer service
model and make poor employees in hospitality or other service industries.73
This book demonstrates how different the various agendas are and the variety
of techniques that spokespersons employ in their quest for legitimacy for, and
control of, the discourse.


INDIGOS AND THE MARKETPLACE

One might ask why it is so important to control the discourse on Indigo
Children. It is obvious that the authors of most of these books are sincerely
interested in promoting a happier and healthier life for children. They are
deeply concerned that certain contemporary children are perceived to be
“monsters” and “incurably ill”, and seek ways to explain these seemingly
unchildlike behaviours. Despite all of these altruistic motives one must also
recognize that there is a lot of money to be made off Indigo Children and their


 68. Carroll & Tober, The Indigo Children 10 Years Later, 11–12. This is rather ironic because
     the back cover of Understanding Your Life Thru Color clearly states that the book is about
     auras and Tappe refers to auras throughout the work.
 69. Ibid., 13.
 70. Ibid., 17.
 71. Ibid., 13.
 72. Ibid.
 73. Ibid., 114–15.


366
                                                                        the new kids