of Western esotericism in this account of religious change. Rather than being
a label for the whole field, a historical class to which “New Age” belongs, it
could be considered one of many historical preconditions for its formation.
In short, taken in a historical sense Western esotericism could be added as a
sixth trait, and seen as another important historical influence on contempo-
rary spirituality.
   If the role of historical esotericism can be reconsidered, so can the typo­
logical and discursive constructs. For example, several of the authors dis-
cussed agree that individual experience is crucial for religious change.
Hanegraaff notes the connection between “gnosis” and New Age ­religion, and
von Stuckrad discusses experience as an epistemic dimension of esoteric dis-
course (although with a shift from private mental events to “discourse”). Stark
and Bainbridge locate an important reason for the innovation of cults in inner
experiences or visions, while Riis and Woodhead note the strong relation
between emotion and charisma, and point to different ways of handling emo-
tion in religious organizations, some of them intentionally aiming at religious
and social change. Finally, in the empirical material a major focus in several if
not all of the activities at Hälsogränden is precisely individual and emotional
experience.
   Von Stuckrad calls attention to the presence of non-Christian traditions
in Western culture, and transfers of meaning between different religious and
non-religious systems. While this is fruitful for historical perspectives, it is
also very relevant for analysing contemporary spirituality. Migration (in sev-
eral senses), cultural transfers and individuals who function as junctions for
the transfer of religions and traditions are all abundant today. Related to glo-
balization, they are crucial factors for the contemporary dynamics of religious
change. Stark and Bainbridge’s concepts of innovation and importation might
prove analytically useful in this context, and could be fruitfully employed
both for analysing the historical developments of Western esotericism and
for contemporary religion.64 Individual experience is one of the crucial ele-
ments of religious change through innovation, while migration (of individu-
als or cultural products) is one of the crucial elements of religious change
through import. Today, globalization has intensified the processes of migra-
tion and importation.65 This is reflected at Hälsogränden, where a conglomer-
ate of elements from different parts of the world is evident. The activities at
Hälsogränden discussed so far also express the characteristics of the client cult
in the sense of Stark and Bainbridge: partial involvement, consumer structure


 64. These concepts also need to be problematized, as is evident from the discussion of plu-
     ralism and the meaning of “mainstream” below. For example, there are constant transfers
     between different environments, and the problems with defining the borders of a culture
     are notorious. There will always be problems of this kind with ideal-types, which, however,
     do not disqualify them as starting points for discussions.
 65. See Frisk, “Globalization”.


386
                                                     a small - town health centre in sweden



(influence of the market economy, in the scheme of Hanegraaff ), and ambiva-
lence between religion and therapy (“psychologization”).

The mainstream perspective

There are, however, also other activities at Hälsogränden, which cannot be
described as “cultic” in the sense of Stark and Bainbridge, as they are part of
the dominant socio-cultural environment rather than being in tension with it.
This concerns the therapist working with dietary issues and physical exercise,
the psychotherapist, and also the hairdressing team, who basically conduct
ordinary hair procedures like haircuts and hair colouring, with healing proce-
dures being merely optional.
   The relationship between esoteric currents and the mainstream has been
discussed by several authors in the Western esotericism debate. Esotericism
has sometimes been understood as being different from Christianity, or pre-
senting alternatives to mainstream interpretations of it. Most important in this
context is Hanegraaff ’s model of the “grand polemical narrative”, where esoter-
icism is understood as an umbrella term for currents or phenomena that have
at some point been seen as problematic by established religion and cultural
institutions.66 Other authors, like von Stuckrad, point to a more ambiguous
relationship between esotericism and the mainstream. While claims of higher
knowledge may at times challenge the truth claims of institutionalized reli-
gious traditions, they may also be part of established and well-accepted cul-
tural domains.
   Focusing on discourses of gnosis or discourses of rejected knowledge has,
in my opinion, the potential for interesting analyses, and may provide a bridge
from the historical currents of Western esotericism to the contemporary envi-
ronment of new religious movements and spirituality. The ambivalence to the
mainstream noted by von Stuckrad also holds for the contemporary environ-
ment. Complicating the matter, there are several different kinds of religious
phenomena with different kinds of relationships to the mainstream. The the-
ory of Stark and Bainbridge may contribute to this discussion by its emphasis
on the possibility for religious groups to be in different degrees of tension with
the mainstream, and for different reasons. Thus the discussion of esotericism
in terms of tension with the mainstream, including polemics, deviance and
opposition, could be inscribed in a larger scholarly discourse encompassing all
kinds of religious and cultural systems with a problematic relationship to the
mainstream.
   The degree of tension with the surrounding socio-cultural environment is
a crucial factor in the theory of Stark and Bainbridge.67 Some phenomena are

 66. Hanegraaff, “Forbidden Knowledge”.
 67. Other interpretations of the definition of tension to society and the world at large exist. For
     a more detailed discussion, see Frisk, Nya Religiösa Rörelser i Sverige.

                                                                                               387
liselotte frisk



considered part of the dominant tradition, while other phenomena are in dif-
ferent degrees of tension with it. This holds true for other cultural sectors than
religion as well. In the medical sector, conventional medicine would be seen as
representing the dominant socio-cultural tradition, building its prestige largely
on appeals to science and the results of clinical ­trials. The same is valid for the
psychological branch of the health care sector, where, taking Hälsogränden in
Hedemora as an example, psychotherapy belongs to the tax-subsidized main-
stream of the Swedish health sector, while Rosen therapy does not.
   This border between mainstream and “holistic” therapies is not, however,
cut in stone. Some therapies, which have at some point been in tension with
the socio-cultural mainstream, could later move towards less tension with
mainstream society, or even to full social acceptance. If a therapeutic prac-
tice is deemed effective through controlled scientific testing it becomes part of
the mainstream.68 One such example is acupuncture, which originally, in the
terminology of Stark and Bainbridge, could be considered to be an imported
client cult, building on supernatural and magical visions of energies in the
physical body. In Sweden acupuncture for pain relief has received mainstream
status in ordinary health care since several years back. It is used in childbirth
for pain relief, as well as in the ordinary health care clinics concerning other
kinds of pain problems.69
   Recently, however, additional therapies from the holistic environment
seem to be crossing the border to, or at least decreasing the tension with, the
mainstream socio-cultural environment. The most evident example is mind-
fulness meditation, which is today routinely used in cognitive–behavioural
therapy with, so it seems, good results.70 In the Dalarna mapping project, we
had examples of courses in mindfulness being conducted for people work-
ing in mainstream health care, funded by the employer. Yoga also seems to be
moving towards greater societal acceptance. Anette Hansson and her life yoga
is an example of this, as she conducts yoga classes in cooperation with the
Swedish social insurance administration and the employment office. Yoga is
also used in other places in Dalarna for employees in mainstream health care.
Hansson says that, in her experience, yoga is much more accepted today than
it was only a few years ago.
   Hälsogränden in Hedemora is thus an example of another trend in Swedish
society as well: the increasingly blurred borders between the medical main-
stream and complementary and alternative therapies. In the context of
increased globalization and cultural pluralism, a concept such as the “dom-
inant socio-cultural environment” loses its meaning. Taking the religious


 68. For a further discussion on deviance and rejected knowledge as it applies to science, see e.g.
     Wallis, On the Margins of Science.
 69. However, other uses of acupuncture would still be considered client cults, as they are not
     accepted in conventional medicine.
 70. Nilsonne, Mindfulness i Hjärnan.


388
                                           a small - town health centre in sweden