to study in the world of religion, and indeed what can even be accepted under
that very label. Still, scholars of esotericism have been curiously conserva-
tive in adopting some other aspects of “post-secular perspectives”. What I am
referring to here is the reluctance to examine non-traditional arenas such as
popular culture,82 or to even acknowledge it as a potentially worthwhile area
of research.83 This is odd, as esoteric influences are so dominant in popular
culture that Christopher Partridge has even proposed that we are witnessing
a shift from a Christian culture to one that is greatly informed by the esoteric
and occult.84 Popular culture is an arena in which requirements for the “seri-
ousness of belief ” and notions of religion as dealing with “ultimate concerns”
must be abandoned, not necessarily due to them not being factors in popular
cultural religiosity, but due to the arena itself demonstrating the artificiality
of limiting religion to such functions. As scholars such as Gordon Lynch and
Lynn Schofield Clarke have noted, popular culture both reflects and directs
our cultural concerns, and it is thus doubly significant as an arena of examina-
tion.85 Still, few scholars other than Christopher Partridge have done much in
the way of actually connecting religious change and popular culture, and even
fewer (Partridge is the exception again) have shown an interest in or recogni-
tion of the major role the esoteric plays in contemporary popular culture.86
   In conjunction with this, and as discussed above, the Habermasian under-
standing of “the public sphere” must be broadened. It needs to include more
than conventional religious institutions, and more than the (official) politi-
cal sphere. “The public sphere” should encompass such phenomena as mass
mediated communication and popular culture. In late modernity, and “post-
secularity” we are witnessing an increasing erosion of the borders between the
private and public spheres. Social networking sites such as Facebook, Myspace
and Twitter are good examples in this regard. In regard to the esoteric and the
public sphere we are then dealing with developments that increasingly take
the esoteric “into the open”, with numerous Facebook pages on esoteric/occult
subjects demonstrating this. One of the results is a relative democratization of
the esoteric.


 82. In defence of scholars of esotericism it should be pointed out that scholars of media, popu-
     lar culture, and religion have been equally slow in recognizing the esoteric as a valid subject
     of study.
 83. This is a direct result of certain (still) dominating definitions and understandings of what
     esotericism “is”. An example is Henrik Bogdan’s discussion of the “[m]igration of esoteric
     ideas into nonesoteric materials”, where popular culture is explicitly mentioned. Popular
     culture is not regarded to be as “properly” esoteric as more classic sources. See Bogdan,
     Western Esotericism and Rituals of Initiation, 20.
 84. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 187. See also Partridge’s chapter in the
     present volume.
 85. Lynch, “Some Concluding Reflections”, 158; Lynn Schofield Clark, “Religion, Twice
     Removed”, 70.
 86. Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West.


324
                   the secular, the post - secular and the esoteric in the public sphere



SECULARIZATION AND “THE POST-SECULAR CONDITION”:
SCIENCE FICTION AND THE ESOTERIC

Science fiction is one of the best and most interesting cases to discuss when it
comes to changes in the public perception of religion in contemporary times.
While it is easy to regard science fiction as the ultimate fiction – it does after
all deal with aliens, far-away worlds, the future and space travel – the genre
does actually reflect very current and socially acute themes. The fantastic set-
ting itself allows for dealing with subjects that might be too controversial to
deal with in other forms of fiction. For example, in 1968 the television series
Star Trek was groundbreaking in showing the first kiss between a white male
and a black female on entertainment television.87 In the present context it is
interesting to note that religion has gone from being one of the most neglected
themes in science fiction in the first half of the twentieth century, to becom-
ing one of the most central themes in the latter half of the century. Star Trek
is again a good example. Whereas the original series (1966–9) included some
casual treatment of religion, mostly as representations of the superstitious and
utterly pre-scientific past of humanity, the later show Star Trek: Deep Space
Nine (1993–2001) has religion as a major theme and, more importantly, allows
for ambiguous interpretations of it.
    It is, however, not Star Trek but the Stargate franchise and the movie
Avatar (2009) that I will look at in more detail here. The Stargate franchise
got its start in 1994 with the movie Stargate. In the movie, an ancient artefact
– a large circular portal – is found in Giza, Egypt. It is determined that the
artefact is of alien origin and functions as a gateway to an alien world (named
Abydos in the subsequent television series), to which a military team (along
with a civilian archaeologist) is sent. We also find out that the old Egyptian
god Ra was actually an alien who had possessed a human host body, subju-
gated humanity through advanced technology and the pretension of being a
god, and was finally driven away from earth in a human uprising. Ra had, how-
ever, transported some humans to the new planet to be his slaves, and the
movie focuses on the liberation of these people and the final defeat of Ra. The
story was continued in the subsequent television series Stargate SG-1 (1997–
2007), Stargate Atlantis (2004–9), Stargate Universe (2009–11), the animated
television series Stargate Infinity (2002–3), as well as several television movies,
novels and comic books. Here we find out that Ra was just one representa-
tive of the parasitic “Goa’uld” species, other representatives of which having
masqueraded as additional Egyptian gods and other mythological beings such
as Ba’al, Cronus and Nirtti. One can definitely read a critique of religion into
the series. However, we are also introduced to the benevolent alien species
“the Asgard”, who impersonate the Old Norse gods in order to protect humans


 87. Star Trek, “Plato’s Stepchildren”.


                                                                                    325
kennet granholm



from the Goa’uld, and who hide their true nature due to humans not yet
being ready (i.e. advanced enough) for such information. Already in the basic
premise of the franchise we find several themes which are, or have been, pop-
ular in esoteric circles. The central role of Egypt is one such theme, with the
Stargate-object found in this country, the majority of the Goa’uld named after
Egyptian deities, and the pyramids presented as landing platforms for alien
spacecraft. A second example is the introduction of the lost city of Atlantis
(actually an ancient alien city-ship) as the setting for one of the series in the
franchise.
   In the present context, the most interesting aspect of Stargate is the
notion of “ascension”. As described in the Stargate Wiki-page on the subject,
“Ascension is a process that allows beings to be able to separate from their
physical bodies and to live eternally as pure energy in a superior plane with
greater amount of knowledge and power.”88 This process is made possible
“once the brain achieves 90% synaptic activity”, and the individual then focuses
his/her brain activity and learns “how to convert their bodies into energy”.89
With ascension comes a number of preternatural abilities, such as control
of the forces of nature, telekinesis and telepathy, manifestation of material
objects at will, possession of non-ascended beings, the ­manipulation of the
perceptions of others, and, perhaps most interestingly in the present context,
the ability to evolve other beings to the level where they can ascend.90 It is the
role played by knowledge which is the most esoteric aspect of ascension in the
Stargate franchise. Knowledge is both something gained when ascending, and
something which is essential in making ascension possible in the first place. As
the character Daniel Jackson says after ascending: “I see things, I understand
things, in a way I never could have before”.91 This means that ascension fits
neatly with von Stuckrad’s conceptualization of the esoteric as dealing with
“higher knowledge” and ways of gaining it. Ascension can be seen as a form of
“gnosis”, a spiritual insight that has the effect of transmuting a being. Initiatory
processes are also involved. The initial process of achieving non-corporeal
existence can be regarded as the first step, but it is not the endpoint of an indi-
vidual’s “enlightenment”. Multiple levels of “higher existence” are posited, and
each subsequent level comes with increased knowledge and extended pow-
ers. As Daniel Jackson comments, “Ascension doesn’t make you all knowing
or all powerful. It is just the beginning of the journey.”92 In borrowing from the