minuscule one, was the obscure Danish occultist Ben Kadosh (Carl William
Hansen, 1872–1936). He did not manage to gather more than a handful of
adherents to this teaching, at most, possibly none at all.13 The next instance of
esoteric Satanism is the considerably more well-populated order Fraternitas
Saturni in 1920s Germany. This order had some features that can clearly be
labelled Satanic, such as Luciferian masses, but whether they were pronounced
enough to justify designating the entire system thus is questionable.14 Problems
of a somewhat similar type arise when trying to peg down the “Satanic” tem-
ple (this was a term she herself used) briefly operated by Maria de Naglowska
in 1930s Paris, which had as its aim an integration of Satan and God.15
    None of these groups and individuals are invoked as predecessors by LaVey,
and none of them have themselves kept a tradition of Satanism alive. Though
some of them, like Kadosh, have inspired present-day Satanist groups, their
ideas have not been passed down in an unbroken line of transmission.16 There
is thus not a single case of an unbroken initiatory chain in the classical sense.
The Theosophical Society and Fraternitas Saturni have both carried on activ-
ity to this day, but their specifically Satanic ideas have played very little or no
part at all in the long run. These elements have, it seems, largely faded away
with time. Hence, there is no reliably documented case of Satanic continu-
ity, in a strict sense, earlier than the founding of the Church of Satan in 1966.
The lack of evidence satisfying a scholar has not hindered some Satanists from
making claims about very deep, but secret, historical roots for their lineages.
LaVey, as we shall see, instead chose to construct tradition in a rather more
inclusive and generous manner where actual continuity, or even Satanic sym-
pathies in the supposed predecessors, are deemed to be of less importance.
Had he known of the groups and individuals mentioned above (or in the case
of Theosophy, that he most certainly had some familiarity with: if he had been
aware of the small and seldom discussed pinch of sympathy for the Devil
incorporated in it) it is quite possible he would have made reference to them.


 13. See Faxneld, “The Strange Case of Ben Kadosh”.
 14. I have earlier – in Faxneld, Mörkrets apostlar, 177–88 – argued they should indeed be
     labelled Satanists, but having pondered the matter for a few years more I am no longer
     quite as convinced this is appropriate.
 15. A good introduction to Naglowska’s ideas is Hakl, “The Theory and Practice of Sexual
     Magic”, 465–74. There are also a couple of other tiny and long-defunct Satanist groups
     that may have been founded prior to the Church of Satan – Raymond Bogart’s Orthodox
     Temple of the Prince in Manchester, UK, and Herbert Sloane’s Our Lady of Endor Coven
     in Toledo, Ohio – but the documentation is unreliable, and neither of them ever provided
     substantial evidence of having existed before 1966, despite insistent claims they had been
     around longer than LaVey’s church. On these two groups, see Faxneld, Mörkrets Apostlar,
     202–15. The Process Church of the Final Judgment, founded well before LaVey established
     the Church of Satan in 1966, seems not to have incorporated the elements of Satanism that
     they later became infamous for until after 1966 (Bainbridge, Satan’s Power, 68–9, 87).
 16. Faxneld, “The Strange Case of Ben Kadosh”.


                                                                                            75
per faxneld



But most of them were extremely obscure, and completely unknown in the
1960s, especially in the United States.


FUNCTION OVER TRADITION

To some extent, LaVey uses references to historical Satanism to strengthen his
legitimacy. More importantly, however, he utilizes (consciously constructed)
tradition as a tool in the same way demons or inverted pentagrams are used –
to generate certain psychological effects. LaVey is at most times explicitly pri-
marily interested in what functions “traditional” Satanic symbols, rituals, and
historiographic narratives have, not their pedigree or formal veracity itself.
   A case in point is the Black Mass, which, according to LaVey, should be
used to rid oneself of inhibitions and false ideals by blaspheming current holy
cows. The point is not to please Satan or mock Christianity, as would typi-
cally be believed about this ritual, but to decondition the participant. In the
1960s, LaVey opines, it would be more useful to denigrate the widely popu-
lar psychedelic movement by trampling an LSD tablet underfoot instead of
communion wafers.17 The purpose of a ritual is to elicit a strong emotional
response from the participants, which can then be used to effect healthy psy-
chological changes.18 For this reason, older blasphemous rituals can never be
used unaltered since they cannot be expected to have the intended effect on
a present-day person. LaVey dryly remarks: “one no longer reads a Victorian
romance for sexual titillation”.19 Whether or not the form of the Black Mass is
traditional is therefore unimportant.
   LaVey’s attitude when it comes to ritual magic is telling in several ways. One
important feature in how he views this phenomenon is that he deems it nec-
essary during rituals to evoke a sense of wonder and amazement, temporarily
shutting down critical, intellectual thinking. This is done in order to achieve
the magician’s goal, “to expand his will”. The room where the ritual takes place
becomes an “intellectual decompression chamber”.20 The purpose is purely
instrumental. It is therefore significant that a major part of LaVey’s references
to tradition occur in the context of descriptions of ritual practices. The tall
tales being told – of Templars, secret fraternities, Middle Eastern Satanic rites,
esoteric knowledge being passed from initiate to initiate, and so on – must be
understood in relation to the “willing suspension of disbelief ” taking place in
the ritual chamber.


 17. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 101. Cf. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 34, concerning the Black Mass:
     “Its prime purpose is to reduce or negate stigma acquired through past indoctrination”.
 18. An analysis of the early Church of Satan that very much stresses this aspect is Moody,
     “Magical Therapy”.
 19. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 25.
 20. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 120.


76
                                                     secret lineages and de facto satanists



   In an interesting article, historian of religions Peter Jackson has discussed
how such suspension can be used in a religious setting even by those who
do believe in supernatural phenomena. By consciously setting aside critical
thinking in a particular ritual situation, they can allow for mechanical devices
(the shaking of metal plates to simulate sudden thunder, etc.) to amaze them
and make the situation even more numinous.21 Whereas the people in the
antique examples treated by Jackson might do this in order to further heighten
the impact of something they actually consider supernatural and numinous,
LaVey suggests “faking” this belief too, simply to achieve the useful effects a
(temporary) traditional religious/esoteric mindset can have.


LAVEY’S REJECTION OF ESOTERIC TRADITION

The attitude evinced by LaVey towards esotericism as a tradition is ambigu-
ous. The Satanic Bible (1969) opens with the following diatribe: “This book
was written because, with very few exceptions, every tract and paper, every
‘secret’ grimoire, all the ‘great works’ on the subject of magic, are noth-
ing but sanctimonious fraud.”22 And on the same page, LaVey lays down that
“[t]he old literature is the by-product of brains festering with fear and defeat”.23
Throughout this and other of his works, he blasts his forebears as having “lain
ill with metaphysical constipation”, and so on.24 Many harsh words are uttered:
“Those with the greatest degree of natural magical ability are often far too
busy with other activities to learn the ‘finer’ points of the Sephiroth, Tarot, I
Ching, etc.” But then he immediately adds: “This is not intended to suggest that
there is no value in arcane wisdom”.25 Its foremost value, however, appears to
be as part of the content in the “storehouse of avowed fantasy gathered from
all cultures and from all ages” that LaVey states a Satanist maintains. Having
access to such a reservoir, a “Satanist can easily invent fairy tales to match any-
thing contained in holy writ”, but at the same time – unlike his Christian com-
patriot – admitting his invention is fictitious.26 The first page of The Satanic
Bible accordingly states: “Herein you will find truth – and fantasy”.27
    Given such frank admissions, how are we to read LaVey’s use of the stereo­
typical arsenal of esoteric legitimization devices? He has, after all, practically
invalidated all religious ideas as such and lowered their status to that of fairy

 21. Jackson, “Apparitions and Apparatuses”. In Jackson’s discussion, belief or disbelief is held up
     as being an often unimportant question, and one aim of his article is to dissolve such sharp
     dichotomies (not only pertaining to Antiquity, but in general).
 22. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 21.
 23. Ibid., 21.
 24. Ibid., 155.
 25. Ibid., 23.
 26. LaVey, The Satanic Rituals, 27 (emphasis added).
 27. LaVey, The Satanic Bible, 21.


                                                                                                77
per faxneld