occult/esoteric we find a strong focus on its “deviance”,9 with Marcello Truzzi
even calling it “a wastebasket, for knowledge claims that are deviant in some
way”.10 While the notion of deviance, so popular in sociological research of the
1970s, has been largely left aside in specialist sociology on, for example, new
religious movements, associated problems remain in sociological research
more broadly. Here, for example, “the occult” often stands for little more than
supernatural beliefs which are difficult to place into any other category.11 This,
of course, makes “esoteric”/”occult” utterly useless in any meaningful analyti-
cal capacity. As Hanegraaff argued over a decade ago, the main problem of
these sociological constructs of “the occult” is precisely their neglect, and pre-
clusion, of historicity.12 Despite these obvious prior shortcomings, we stress
that the historiographic study of the esoteric could still benefit from sociologi-
cal perspectives, just as sociological studies need to be informed by the con-
ceptual frameworks and historical awareness developed by historical research.
   One aspect of the historiographic study of esotericism which becomes
increasingly problematic when we move to contemporary expressions is a pre-
dominant focus on elite representatives. In a Faivrean approach, the “esoteric
form of thought” is primarily expressed in the intellectual philosophies and
theologies of men like Ficino, Pico, Paracelsus, Bruno, Dee, Khunrath, Maier,
Fludd, and so on, whereas “lowbrow” folk expressions are typically neglected.13
This also involves the elevation of originally more popular material to “high
culture” when the need arises; the origins of Rosicrucianism from a fictitious
“ludibrium” (to paraphrase the statement of Johann Valentin Andreae, one of
the masterminds behind the Rosicrucian manifestos) might already indicate
this tension.14 Partly this might be due to fewer traces of “lowbrow culture”
having survived in historical records, but the overall ethos nevertheless intro-
duces major problems when examining contemporary esotericism. Pamphlets
of “New Age spirituality” will undoubtedly compare unfavourably with the
philosophy of Ficino, and online message board discussions between con-
temporary Satanists are less impressive than an arcane letter correspondence


   9. See e.g. Colin Campbell, “The Cult, The Cultic Milieu and Secularization”; Tiryakian,
      “Toward the Sociology of Esoteric Culture”, 272.
 10. Truzzi, “Definitions and Dimensions of the Occult”, 245. See the criticism of these
      approaches to “the occult” in Hanegraaff, “On the Construction of ‘Esoteric Traditions’”,
      29–42.
 11. See e.g. McGuire, Religion, 121–2; Lynn Schofield Clark, From Angels to Aliens.
 12. Hanegraaff, “On the Construction of ‘Esoteric Traditions’”, 41.
 13. It is in fact quite noteworthy that there is not more collaboration and overlap between
      the scholarly communities studying esotericism, and those focusing on medieval and early
      modern magic and folk traditions – as expressed e.g. by the journal Magic, Ritual, and
      Witchcraft and the organization Societas Magica. While the occasional researcher would
      contribute to both “fields”, a separation does seem to exist, and it seems to broadly follow
      social distinctions along the line of “elite” versus “folk”/“vernacular”.
 14. See Chapter 2 of this volume for more discussion on this particular theme.



                                                                                                5
egil asprem and kennet granholm



between alchemists in the early modern “republic of letters”.15 This does not,
however, automatically imply that such materials are any less important for
academic research, and scholars should in any case avoid such biases. As we
will suggest, the elite bias becomes particularly problematic when recognizing
that contemporary esotericism is intimately, and increasingly, connected with
popular culture and new media.
   In conclusion, then, the agenda of the present volume is twofold: first, to
emphasize the need for expanding the field of Western esotericism to encom-
pass contemporary issues; and second, in so doing, to integrate the study of
esotericism firmly with approaches and perspectives from the study of reli-
gion more broadly. Not only do we believe that such integration is imperative
in order to sufficiently explore contemporary esotericism, but it also seems
desirable in order to prevent the field from falling into professional isolation.
Avoiding that fate and instead inviting a constructive and integrative dialogue
between esotericism research and other subdisciplines of religious studies,
especially the social scientific ones, has the promise of benefiting all parties.
This volume offers an attempt to open up the field in these ways and provide
mutual relevance. In so doing, it will be found to ask more new questions than
it will answer.


THE STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK

The volume is divided into four parts, each with a specific focal point. These
deal with issues of tradition in esotericism; with the impact of new media and
popular culture on the esoteric today; with “esoteric transfers” (i.e. the influ-
ence of the esoteric on other social spheres that are traditionally thought of as
“non-esoteric” and “non-religious”); and with the esoteric “leaving the mar-
gins” in a multitude of ways. While thematically separated, the sections are
also tightly interwoven. As will become apparent in reading the book, chap-
ters in one section frequently interact with the themes of other ones, and
cross-references between chapters are frequent. Furthermore, there is a red
thread running throughout the volume, which attempts to introduce a unity
which is more common to monographs than to edited works. Thus, all chap-
ters of the volume deal to some degree with issues of methodology and theory
relevant particularly for the examination of contemporary esotericism, while
at the same time engaging with associated issues in religious studies at large.



 15. Cf. Olav Hammer’s assessment of the quality of “New Age” creativity, “whereas the
     Romantic conception was capable of producing works of the greatest beauty, the literary,
     musical and artistic products of the New Age are sometimes indistinguishable from reli-
     gious kitsch” (Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 508). On using the new types of text emer­
     ging online in research, see Chapter 7 of this volume.


6
                                                                     introduction



Tradition

The appeal to tradition, particularly connected to lost ancient wisdom, or per-
ennial higher truth, is a central feature of much esoteric discourse, but so is
the rhetoric of rationality and notions of progress and growth. Furthermore,
claims to tradition are intrinsically linked to questions of identity and posi-
tioning in broader discursive fields, including politics and religion. The chap-
ters of this section deal with the claims to, and constructions of, tradition in
contemporary esoteric discourse, and elucidate the significance of tradition
vis-à-vis conceptions of “modernity”.
   In Chapter 2, the first chapter of Part I, Egil Asprem and Kennet Granholm
provide an introduction to the overall theme, discussing issues of general rel-
evance to the construction of tradition and looking at these issues in the more
focused context of the esoteric. Esotericism has historically been deeply con-
nected to the concept of “tradition” in several ways, from a preoccupation
with “perennial philosophy” and “ancient sages” on the emic level, to being
itself often constructed as a neglected or subversive “esoteric” or “occult tradi-
tion” on the etic level. It should, however, be recognized that several different
understandings of “tradition” are employed by scholars, and it is necessary to
reflect on what is meant by the term before attempting an analysis. For exam-
ple, anthropologically informed studies tend to use the term “traditional reli-
gion” to denote various forms of tribal religions unaffected by modernizing
forces, and sociological studies similarly employ the term as a vague referent
for “religion in the past”. Another general use is simply “tradition” as a syno-
nym for “religion” (e.g. “the Christian tradition” signifying “Christianity”). A
common problem is that of homogenization. In anthropological understand-
ings all “tribal religion” can easily be perceived as sharing some essential
similarity, whereas in sociological understandings a unified past is projected
backward in order to reflect on the fragmentation of modernity.
   In their chapter, Asprem and Granholm argue that it is more fruitful to
focus on the construction or invention of tradition. In the sense of being the
creation of human activities, all tradition – in whichever sense the term is used
– is of course invented. Intriguingly, instead of existing as separate, autono-
mous, and independent institutions which scholars may study and leave unaf-
fected, tradition has often been the outcome of processes of invention in which
scholars have played pivotal roles. This has sometimes happened actively and
intentionally, as in the nationalistically and religiously informed projection
of shamanism as a “universal and archaic technique of ecstasy”, and at other
times unwittingly, as when esotericists are informed by scholarly accounts
of the esoteric and align their philosophies and practices accordingly. Today,
the role of scholarship in conferring legitimacy on self-identified “esotericists”
by providing frameworks for tradition is, perhaps, an inconvenient truth to
many scholars in the field, but one that demands more attention. Additionally,
when it comes to contemporary inventions of ­identity and ­tradition, fictitious

                                                                                7
egil asprem and kennet granholm