identifiable groups often transcend any easy categorization as “satanic”, blend-
ing with other discernible clusters such as the “neopagan” and “Left-Hand
Path” milieus. Neither field is completely congruent with each other, but they
do share a lot of discursive ground, most notably the focus on expressing or
transforming the self and the eclectic use of ritualized practices such as magi-
cal work, art, music, poetry, or any combination of these. More specifically,
what Nevill Drury has dubbed the “cthonian” orientation towards the car-
nal, the transgressive, and the subconscious, as well as the choice of darker
gods such as Satan, Set and Kali, makes associations between “satanic” and
“Left-Hand Path” groups especially salient and solid boundaries between their
respective discourse and practices particularly difficult to trace.17
    In an attempt to manage this complexity, we can approach modern
Satanism as related to esoteric discourse in general through two complemen-
tary strategies of appropriation, namely “secularizing” the esoteric and “esoter-
icizing” the secular.18 By combining concrete “boundary-work” with strategies
of legitimation in the satanic milieu, we can see how particular understand-
ings of Satanism are actively built by engaging with a wide variety of cultural
material, simultaneously constructing a positive self-religion and distancing
oneself from other, competing articulations. Hence rationalist Satanism(s) in
the tradition of LaVey (including groups outside the church but sympathetic
to the ideology of the founder) are foregrounding natural and pragmatic ele-
ments, but infusing the secular narrative with esoteric modes of legitimacy,
while esoteric Satanism(s) are suffusing the esoteric structure of the “cthonian”
with secular modes of legitimacy. In contrast to the systematic discourse of
these two types, reactive Satanism(s) are appropriating cultural narratives and
stereotypes of Satanism as a strategy of resistance-through-inversion, making
it a category on the border between the satanic milieu and generalized rebel-
lion.19 In general, the “cthonian” style has had a lot of success in horror movies,
avant-garde art, and “deviant” subculture: vampire groups, modern primitives
and Goths listening to post-punk, industrial and metal, to name a few “scenes”,
regularly tap into material provided by Satanism and the Left-Hand Path.20
Conversely, formal groups in both milieus are trying to control the socializa-
tion of subcultural “tourists”, dedicated “seekers”, and devoted “members” in


 17. See Drury, Rosaleen Norton’s Contribution to the Western Esoteric Tradition, chapter 3;
     Granholm, “Embracing Others Than Satan”; Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West,
     vol. 1, 78–84; vol. 2, 207–55; Petersen, “Introduction”; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan” for
     academic discussions.
 18. This understanding of Satanism and its relation to esotericism is indebted to Kocku von
     Stuckrad, Olav Hammer and Wouter Hanegraaff; on this, see Petersen, “‘We Demand
     Bedrock Knowledge’”, especially 69–73, 103–9; Petersen, “The Seeds of Satan”, 94–101,
     107–9.
 19. On my typology, see especially Petersen, “Introduction”, 6–7; Petersen, “Smite Him”.
 20. For examples, see Baddeley, Lucifer Rising; Laycock, Vampires Today; Nocturnum, Embra­
     cing the Darkness; Petros, Art that Kills.


138
                                                                    from book to bit



terms of guided consumption, but to various effects. Outside formal groups
the control is entirely individual. In this sense, popular culture and “occulture”
are pathways to and from the satanic milieu, blurring core and peripheries
considerably.21
   Returning to clashes and “flame wars”, the conflict over the nature of mod-
ern Satanism and LaVey’s heritage in particular intensified after his death
in 1997, culminating in a gradual exodus of disgruntled members from the
Church of Satan in the early 2000s as the leadership changed.22 Many of these
ex-members created websites and local networks, which in turn has forced the
Church of Satan to step up its Internet presence while still repeating the trivi-
alizing rhetoric on cyberspace.23 The present constitution of the satanic milieu
seems to stimulate two distinct reactions to online community building and
Internet Satanism, an inclusive/tolerant and an exclusive/dismissive, based on
the strength of offline presence as well as organizational integration. This mir-
rors the activities of many other esoteric “subcultures” online.
   The first can be exemplified by Venus Satanas, author of a large amount of
YouTube clips and the hostess of the website Spiritual Satanist, an associated
blog, online store, Facebook page, and live video feed of exotic pole dancing.24
On her website, she states:

      Since there are many methods of expressing Satanism, you have
      to find the one that suits you the best. Only you can know what is
      right for you in the end. Your choice should be a spiritual or philo­
      sophical commitment that is based on an informed decision. In
      my opinion, there is no one right way to be a Satanist; they are all
      forms of Satanic expression. But, no matter what the origin of our
      beliefs, as Satanists, we are all a part of the current of Satanism.25

As a consequence, she formed the Horde of Independent SatanistS (HISS) in
2008 with another Satanist, Nagasiva Yronwode (aka NocTifer), to provide
apprenticeship and correspondence for Satanists of a more theistic and eso-
teric bent. Both are quite prolific writers and networkers on the Internet out-
side the auspices of the Church of Satan, and as such, they blend into the wider
assemblage of Thelemites, Chaos Magicians, and followers of the Left-Hand
Path that are active online. This feeling of connection and “movement” is con-
firmed by Corvis Nocturnum – reiki practitioner, psychometrist, Warlock in
the Church of Satan and author of Embracing the Darkness:


 21. On pathways, see e.g. Campbell & McIver, “Cultural Sources of Support”; Dyrendal,
     “Devilish Consumption”.
 22. I discuss this briefly in Petersen, “Satanists and Nuts”, 242–3.
 23. See e.g. Paradise, Bearing the Devil’s Mark, 60–66.
 24. For links to all these sites see Satanas, “Spiritualsatanist.com”.
 25. Satanas, “Foundations of Satanism”.


                                                                                  139
jesper aagaard petersen



      What becomes clear is that most, if not all of the subcultures cov-
      ered in this book overlap, having been shaped by the effects of
      shared philosophies. In doing so, individuals within these subcul-
      tures come to share an appreciation for similar ideals, and eventu-
      ally form larger communities. … The answer lies in not focusing on
      the lines of the picture, but in stepping back and letting these lines
      blur until all you see is that one image that we’ve become.26

In Nocturnum’s vision, Goth, dark spirituality, Satanism, Vampirism and
BDSM are “dark subcultures” which cohere in shared ideals, philosophies and
values.
   Of course, not all Satanists agree with this “letting the lines blur” or “many-
in-one image” of Satanism. Peter H. Gilmore, current high priest of the Church
of Satan, represents the second position based on exclusivity (“the alien elite”
in church parlance). Interviewed in Nocturnum’s book about adolescents and
“pseudo-Satanism”, Gilmore remarks:

      There are definitely some pathetic web sites and hilariously goofy
      “organizations,” which are usually some disturbed fellow with a
      web site and his equally naive online pals pretending to be “evil”.
      That sort of rebellion, using pre-packaged “dark” imagery, usually is
      short-lived. The only folks who regularly see these antics are peo-
      ple who take a good deal of time to search them out, as the sites
      and chat rooms that these wannabes frequent receive little traffic.27

Like Satanas and HISS, the Church of Satan has an active presence on the
Internet – an official website established in 1997, several semi-official com-
munity sites, and a host of affiliated sites like the CoS Emporium (shopping)
and Radio Free Satan (media). Nevertheless, it is quite clear that most of the
offerings online are viewed as misguided at best; Satanism needs to be lived
in the real world, through concrete accomplishments based on a thorough
understanding of Anton LaVey’s books. Gilmore has a quite conscious “tun-
nel vision”, viewing all non-aligned Satanists online and offline as losers, devil
worshippers, or rebel poseurs. By contrasting “we Satanists” with the “ghetto
of online Satanism”, the high priest simultaneously downplays the numbers,
coherence, and influence of social contenders and monopolizes satanic dis-
course as “LaVeyan”.28


 26. Nocturnum, Embracing the Darkness, 233. Nocturnum’s bioblurb can be found on page
     235.
 27. Gilmore, in ibid., 139.
 28. See for example Gilmore, “A Map for the Misdirected”; Gilmore, The Satanic Scriptures,
     170–86; and many interviews available online such as Shankbone, “Satanism”. This posi-
     tion is frequently and forcefully asserted on affiliated community sites as well. See also the


140
                                                                          from book to bit



   While the reactions of Gilmore or some Church of Satan zealots are not
surprising, the reciprocal “defrocking” of the “Black Pope”, his successor
Gilmore, and the institution itself by ex-members and non-joiners are even
less unexpected. Thus the Internet is overflowing with Church of Satan “rap
sheets”, LaVey biographies and “anti-LaVey” statements. Such dismissiveness
is not rare in cultic circles, but it has a certain edge in the case of the Church
of Satan because of its age, founder and status.


VIRTUAL MILIEUS, IMAGINED COMMUNITIES:
MODELLING THE SATANIC MILIEU ONLINE