In order to better understand the relationship between the public and the pri-
vate sphere in modern Western societies, we must have a closer look at the
forms of community that have emerged here since the Enlightenment. I call
this perspective communitarization. An influential differentiation in sociol-
ogy is the distinction between primary and secondary groups. One of the first
scholars who detailed this conceptual dichotomy was Ferdinand Tönnies.14 He
differentiated between Gemeinschaft on the one hand, which is compatible
to primary group affiliation in pre-modern societies, and Gesellschaft on the
other hand, which roughly corresponds to the forms of association found in
impersonal groups reflecting the social formation of modern, urban societies.
In 1890, Georg Simmel picked up this distinction and described two major
types of groups: those in which personal attributes dominate relationships,
such as friendship and kinship groups, and those in which an individual’s offi-
cial position dominates the relationship.15 For Simmel, the first type was most
common in religious association and ­socialization, while the latter was appli-
cable to, for instance, the official role of a Catholic priest who dominates the
relationship with his parishioners.
   Max Weber further elaborated on these distinctions.16 He defined the “for-
mation of community” (Vergemeinschaftung) as “a social relationship if and
to the extent that the orientation of social action – whether in the individual
case, or average case, or as a pure type – rests upon subjectively felt (affectual
or traditional) mutual belonging (Zusammengehörigkeit) of the participants”.
In contrast to this, Weber defined the “formation of association” (Vergesell­
schaftung) as “a social relationship if and to the extent that the orientation
of social action rests upon the rationally motivated (either value-rational or


 14. Tönnies, Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft.
 15. Simmel, “Über sociale Differenzierung”.
 16. Weber, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft, 1–30.


230
                                              discursive transfers and reconfigurations



instrumentally rational) balancing out of interests or upon similarly motivated
linking of interests”.17
   In a parallel movement to the emergence of public spheres in modern soci-
eties, since the eighteenth century many new forms of Vergemeinschaftung
have entered the social fields. Politically, one of the most important forms was
the birth of the nation. Calling nationalism and “nation-ness” “cultural arte-
facts”, Benedict Anderson argues

      that the creation of these artefacts towards the end of the eight-
      eenth century was the spontaneous distillation of a complex
      “crossing” of discrete historical forces; but that, once created, they
      became “modular,” capable of being transplanted, with varying
      degrees of self-consciousness, to a great variety of social terrains,
      to merge and be merged with a correspondingly wide variety of
      political and ideological constellations.18

This reshaping of the religious field during the nineteenth and twentieth cen-
turies led to the emergence of national identities that create new forms of
“mutual belonging” and emotional attachment. A civil identity was added to
the religious group identities, which had impact on religious communities as
well. And it had influence on political communities: For instance, the völkisch
movements in Germany and the subsequent idealization of the nation as a
“body of community” absorbed religious ideas and thus sacralized the politi-
cal realm. Political theologies have been important not only for National
Socialism, but are a characteristic of political discourse in modern Europe
more generally.19
   Another aspect of communitarization is linked to the processes of indi-
vidualization that sociologists observe in modern Western societies. We are
confronted here with a paradoxical situation. On the one hand, the com-
mon narrative has it that modernization has led to an increased individuali-
zation and a turn to the interior self as the source of religious experiences.
Charles Taylor and Anthony Giddens call this the “disembedding” that char-
acterizes modernization. In Giddens’s definition, disembedding is “the ‘lifting
out’ of social relations from local contexts of interaction and their restruc-
turing across indefinite spans of time-space”.20 On the other hand, the narra-
tive of individualization and disembedding is difficult to match with the thesis


 17. I took this translation from Whimster, The Essential Weber, 343–4. On the importance that
     Weber attributed to the sect as a particularly successful form of community in the shaping
     of Western modernity, see Riesebrodt, “Religiöse Vergemeinschaftungen”, 115–17.
 18. Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities, 4.
 19. See the contributions in de Vries & Sullivan, Political Theologies.
 20. Giddens, The Consequences of Modernity, 21. On the phenomenon of a “globalized” disem-
     bedding see Stahl, “Religious Opposition to Globalization”, 345–6.


                                                                                          231
kocku von stuckrad



that religions have massively entered the modern public spheres.21 Maybe we
can find an answer to this seeming paradox by taking into account that dis-
embedded religious identities are not necessarily private; that the notion of
individualization is itself partly informed by a pessimistic narrative of “loss of
community and meaning” in the modern age; and that on fields of discourse
new agents can claim their place and their access to forms of capital, including
agents that propagate individualism.
   Often, and in a complex development, individualization has not led to
solipsistic forms of religious experience. It has also led to an ideology of the
individual, with new group identities as “being individual”. Perhaps the best
example of this is the so-called New Age movement: here, the religious quest
is highly individualized and even expected from practitioners, but at the same
time the textual and experiential arsenal available to the members is limited
and almost canonized – something that Olav Hammer calls the “individualis-
tic imperative”.22 Other forms of community that are available to the individ-
ual include communities of reading – from popularized science to the Harry
Potter series23 – and virtual communities that have emerged as part of the
Internet revolution.24


Scientification

A second perspective on the reconfiguration of religious fields of discourse
can be called scientification. This process has many different layers, all of them
being linked to concepts of knowledge in one way or another. To begin with,
the last two-hundred years have seen the institutionalization of the study of
religion as an academic discipline. As a result, knowledge about religion has
been professionalized and the ways of exploring religion have been discussed
in disciplines such as anthropology, sociology, and non-confessional religious
studies, or Religionswissenschaft. This also led to an enormous growth of reli-
gious texts and historical materials that have become available since the nine-
teenth century.25


 21. As an influential essay that argues in such a way, see Casanova, Public Religions in the
     Modern World.
 22. Hammer, “I Did It My Way?”. On processes of communitarization in neopaganism see Pike,
     Earthly Bodies, Magical Selves.
 23. Regarding the earlier history of these communities, see Colclough, Consuming Texts. On
     popularized science, which is a major influence on modern esotericism and New Age cul-
     ture, see Bowler, Science for All; Gregory & Miller, Science in Public; Midgley, Science as
     Salvation; and particularly Leane, Reading Popular Physics.
 24. See, among many other publications, Wu Song, Virtual Communities; Panteli, Virtual
     Social Networks; Sohn, Social Network Structures and the Internet; Aupers & Houtman,
     Religions of Modernity.
 25. See Kippenberg, Discovering Religious History in the Modern Age.


232
                                             discursive transfers and reconfigurations