In the decade after 9/11, the high-tech hippie utopianism of this New Edge
movement (visible not just as an online community but also in very popu-
lar annual festivals such as Burning Man in Nevada’s Black Rock Desert) has
taken on progressively darker and apocalyptic shades. In its stronger versions,
global capitalist consumer society is perceived as a huge, impersonal, demonic
system of dominance and control, with politicians and the media hypnotiz-
ing the population into tacit submission and enslavement to “the matrix”.47
In that context, Native American cultures and their shamanic spirituality are
seen as preservers of a traditional wisdom that Western society has tragically
lost: they belong to the “Forces of Light” set against the powers of darkness
that seek to enslave and dominate the planet. Entheogenic sacraments are
credited with the capacity of breaking mainstream society’s spell of mental
domination and restoring us from blind and passive consumers unconsciously
manipulated by “the system” to our original state of free and autonomous spir-
itual beings: quite like Morpheus’s “pill” in The Matrix, they open participants’
eyes, causing them to wake up to the true nature of the collective deception
passed on as “reality” (“the world that has been pulled over your eyes to blind
you from the truth”48), and introduce them to a wider, meaningful universe
of spiritual truth, love and light. In short, they are seen as providing gnosis in
a “gnostic–dualistic” rather than a “hermetic” sense: a salvational knowledge
of the true nature of one’s self and of the universe, which does not just open
the individual’s spiritual eyes, but liberates him from dominion by the cosmic
system.


CONCLUDING REMARKS

It is, of course, impossible to predict how these contemporary manifestations
of entheogenic esotericism will develop in the future. But that they already rep-
resent a significant phenomenon in contemporary culture is clear, and schol-
ars of religion have an obligation to study them closely and find ways to place
them in their proper historical, social and cultural contexts. The gist of this
chapter is that in order to do so, scholars will need to take the ­phenomenon of


 46. Zandbergen, “Silicon Valley New Age”, 161, 163.
 47. The reference is, of course, to the famous 1999 movie by the Wachowski brothers. On
     the gnostic nature of The Matrix series, see e.g. Flannery-Dailey & Wagner, “Wake Up!”;
     Bowman, “The Gnostic Illusion”.
 48. Formulation by Morpheus during his first meeting with Neo in The Matrix. This dialogue
     amounts to a short catechism of neo-gnosticism.


408
                                                        entheogenic esotericism



“entheogenic religion” much more seriously than they have been doing so far.
Whether we like it or not, we are dealing here with a vital and vibrant dimen-
sion of popular Western spirituality that has been with us for more than half
a century now, and shows no signs of disappearing. It challenges traditional
assumptions about what religion is all about, and its radical focus on ecstatic
gnosis within a cosmotheistic context makes it particularly interesting from
the perspective of the study of Western esotericism. Specialists in the field
of contemporary religion should become aware of their inherited blind spots
regarding the role that entheogens have been playing in these contexts for half
a century. That role is not marginal, but central, and requires serious study.
Scholars may have agendas and preoccupations of their own, but these cannot
be an excuse for refusing to take notice of what is happening right in front of
our eyes.




                                                                           409
chapter 20

A DELICIOUSLY TROUBLING DUO
GENDER AND ESOTERICISM

Jay Johnston




The definitions, boundaries and constituents signified by the terms “gender”
and “esotericism” are necessarily troubling and dynamic. As is evidenced
throughout this volume, the academic study of esotericism has included rig-
orous and ongoing debates about the field and its “objects” of study. Similarly
– but with amplification – the academic study of gender is an ever-expanding
labyrinth of contested definitions, discourses and practices. To draw these two
lively areas together can only create more trouble; trouble for conceptual cat-
egories, for binary logics, and for dominant discursive practices. Such trouble
is both inspiring and imperative.
    This chapter aims to canvas not only some of the valuable work already
achieved in the study of contemporary esotericism and gender, but also to
identify enduring tribulations and places of silence. No doubt some of these
are over-ripe for analysis; however, not every dilemma is in need of resolution.
In fact, withholding the desire to resolve and represent in favour of teasing out
difficulties and sitting with the politics their difference engenders is often as
academically valuable as the proposition of a synthesized logic or resolution.
The aim therefore is not a definitive or exhaustive overview, but an opening
out of discussion, a re-evaluation of relations and a celebration of the prob-
lematic. How could it be otherwise when both key terms remain contested
and nebulous?
    In order to commence, the “necessary evil” of providing some definitional
ground remains requisite. The accounts of terminology detailed below are
necessarily provisional and most valuable for the way in which they incorpo-
rate and accommodate conceptual change and multiplicity. Turning first to
esotericism, the dynamic debates about its definition and field (and, as the edi-
tors of this volume so clearly articulate, its increasing status as an “object”) are
encountered elsewhere in this volume and there is certainly no need to sup-
plement that erudite analysis. It is instructive to note that in thinking through
gender and esotericism in the contemporary world, Kocku von Stuckrad’s

410
                                                              a deliciously troubling duo



proposition of esotericism as an “element of discourse”1 is most salient and
applicable. The necessarily interdisciplinary nature of the study of esotericism
is accommodated in von Stuckrad’s figuring, as is the deeply contextual mode
of critical analysis it advocates. Such methodologies – especially those asso-
ciated with the projects of Michel Foucault and Pierre Bourdieu, and their
troub­ling of the “subject” and the “field” – have figured prominently in the
critical approaches deployed in gender and cultural studies. Taken as an “ele-
ment of discourse” esotericism is an aspect of deeply complex forms of inter-
sectionality, implicit with discourses of gender, race, power and class (to name
a few). To this end, this chapter focuses its examination on esotericism’s inter-
relation with the critical category of gender.
    Deployed in numerous ways over the past one hundred years or so, “gen-
der” has signalled everything from specifically women’s subjectivity, repro-
ductive biology, sexual orientation and subject positions. The once clear-cut
analytic distinction between the terms “sex” (biology) and “gender” (cultural
and social roles) has been thoroughly destabilized.2 The normative categori-
zation of dimorphic gender (that is, that only two gender positions are avail-
able: female and male) has been the focus of sustained critical scrutiny, leading
to conceptualizations of gender as a spectrum of possible subject positions.
Accompanying this work, biological essentialism (biological determinist) and
social constructivism as the only two options available for the ontological con-
ception of gender have similarly been critiqued: their mutual imbrication now
a feature of many contemporary approaches. Thus in summary, critical theory
and post-structural approaches have thoroughly undermined the binary logic
upon which much gender thinking had been established, and in so doing iden-
tified the “centrality”, endurance and potentiality of the non-normative, devi-
ant and unstable subject.
    Regarding this vexing “gender” term, Morny Joy’s overview of its interpre-
tation and application within the field of religious studies is instructive for the
consideration of its use vis-à-vis Western esotericism. Joy acknowledges, but
does not step into, the essentialist and/or constructivist gender debates (or the
degree of the mutual imbrication of these positions); rather, she focuses on the
diverse ways in which the term has been deployed in the academic study of
religion.3 Summarizing the outcome of this diversity, Joy notes:

         As a consequence, “gender,” insofar as it is an integral element of all
         religion, has been disentangled from its former assumed function
         as a natural element of sexuality to a recognized means of impos-
         ing idealized expectations, if not obligations. As such, “gender,” as a
         simplistic coding can never be taken for granted again.4

   1.   Von Stuckrad, Western Esotericism, 10.
   2.   See Butler, Gender Trouble; Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs and Women.
   3.   Joy, “The Impact of Gender on Religious Studies”.
   4.   Ibid., 101.

                                                                                     411
jay johnston



From a term initially employed to signal “woman” to a marker of strategy for
“subversive disturbance” of normativity, many of these modes of use are to
be found within contemporary analysis of esotericism, some of which are
detailed below. The subversive potential of contemporary gender theory will
also be considered, especially in relation to what is generally assumed (as a
popular and enduring trope) to be the inherent subversive nature of esoteric
discourses per se. The prescription of subversion – the discursive positioning
of esotericism – itself is the result of normative logic and dominant cultural
expectation.


AREAS, APPROACHES AND ARGUMENTS