As has been pointed out by Clifford Geertz, Hayden White and others, the
scholar of religion is also an author whose writings influence his or her object
of study.26 In other words: The study of religion has lost its imagined role as
mere observer and scholars have entered the fields of religious discourse as
actors and stakeholders. Scholars standardize and publicize knowledge about
religion to such an extent that in some instances they can even be consid-
ered the founders of new religions. This is particularly true with regard to
Theosophy, witchcraft, neopaganism, modern Western shamanism, and vari-
ous New Age milieus. All these movements were heavily influenced by aca-
demic theories about the history of religion and the place and continuation of
non-Christian elements within this historical narrative.27
    The process of scientification has yet another important dynamic. Since the
eighteenth century a new episteme (in the Foucauldian sense) has emerged
that considers the theories and methods of the natural sciences to be the only
way to produce acknowledged and reliable knowledge of the world. In what
I call a “polemical disjunction”, branches of knowledge that still used to be
regarded as united in the early modern period now were presented as entirely
separated and even mutually exclusive: astrology versus astronomy, alchemy
versus chemistry, or magic versus science. At the same time, religious and
metaphysical elements of the “old sciences” are still present in metaphors of
contemporary science, a fact that I call a “subcutaneous continuity”.28 As I will
explain in more detail below, on religious fields of discourse natural scientists
can act as interpreters of the essence of the world and can thus provide mean-
ing beyond the limited system of scientific argumentation.
    In the wake of this new episteme religious practitioners turned to scientific
models of explanation in order to prove the truth of their claims. Again, the
discursive field of esotericism is a particularly good example of this, from the
Theosophical Society to the New Age.29 But the scientific need of explanation
is also felt in other religious contexts. The Roman Catholic Church itself is par-
ticipating in this discourse, for instance with its attempt to prove scientifically
that condoms do not protect against HIV/AIDS.30 The Pontifical Academy of
Sciences regularly hosts conferences that try to link scientific explanation and
method to topics of religious interest. In 2009, a remarkable “Study Week on
Astrobiology” was organized, with the brochure saying in its introduction:



 26. Geertz, Works and Lives; Hayden White, Metahistory. See also Tenbruck, “Die Religion im
     Maelstrom der Reflexion”. On the example of myth see Strenski, Four Theories of Myth.
 27. On the example of shamanism see von Stuckrad, Schamanismus und Esoterik, 279–84; cf.
     Chapter 2 of this volume.
 28. See von Stuckrad, “Zo zijn we niet getrouwd”.
 29. As a contribution to this topic see Hammer, Claiming Knowledge, 201–330 (“Scientism as a
     Language of Faith”). See also Chapter 16 of the present volume.
 30. See Benavides, “Western Religion and the Self-Canceling of Modernity”, 104–5.


                                                                                        233
kocku von stuckrad



      Astrobiology is the study of life’s relationship to the rest of the cos-
      mos: its major themes include the origin of life and its precursor
      materials, the evolution of life on Earth, its future prospects on and
      off the Earth, and the occurrence of life elsewhere. Behind each of
      these themes is a multidisciplinary set of questions involving phys-
      ics, chemistry, biology, geology, astronomy, planetology, and other
      fields, each of which connects more or less strongly to the central
      questions of astrobiology.31

This example not only reveals the processes of scientification; it also makes
clear that the fields of modern esoteric discourse – in this case “mystical
astronomy” – are open and by no means populated by marginal actors only.


Aestheticization

A third perspective on religious change can be conceptualized as aestheti-
cization. In the academic study of religion and culture, the notion of “aes-
thetics” has received remarkable new interest recently.32 Scholars refer to
Aristotle’s understanding of aisthesis as our perception of the world through
our five senses as an undivided whole. In De Anima, Aristotle argues that
it is the capability of the human psyche to have a total sensorial experience
of the world and to gain a sensuous knowledge of it. In Western intellectual
discourse since the Enlightenment, such an understanding of the aesthetic
dimension of knowledge and experience has gradually been substituted by
a separation of the aesthetic and the bodily dimensions, or, rather, by privil­
eging sensations received by the eye (and subsequently the visual metaphors
of knowing). The influence of Immanuel Kant and later neo-Kantian aesthetic
theory has been crucial in this regard. It is with Merleau-Ponty and his work
on perception that the Aristotelian understanding of aisthetic experiences and
forms of knowledge reappeared in cultural and philosophical interpretations.33
The division between bodily sensation and knowledge of the mind was criti-
cally addressed, as was the division between “high art” (stored and exhibited
at special places) and “low art” (often referred to as kitsch or mass-produced
imagery and objects).
    It can be argued that the modern episteme is not only built on rationality
and reason, but equally on imagination and the mediated figurativeness of the


 31. Pontifical Academy of Sciences, A Study Week on Astrobiology, 3.
 32. Meyer & Verrips, “Aesthetics”, provides a good overview.
 33. Merleau-Ponty, Phénoménologie de la Perception. On the critical response to neo-­Kantian
     aesthetics see also Plate, Walter Benjamin, Religion, and Aesthetics. In his reading of
     Wittgenstein, Richard Shusterman coined the term “somaesthetics”, which was picked up
     by scholars of culture, as well; see Shusterman, “Wittgenstein’s Somaesthetics”.


234
                                                discursive transfers and reconfigurations



new worldviews. Scholars have applied this analysis to the “aestheticization of
everyday life”,34 to the realm of politics and power,35 and to the creation of the
modern self.36 But the pivotal interrelations between religion and the aesthetic
aspects of modernization are yet to be explored. In what has been called the
“aesthetic turn” such a reorganization of the aesthetic dimensions of knowl-
edge was picked up by scholars of religion and culture. Pushing the bounda-
ries of visual culture, scholars now argue for a more contextualized, embodied
understanding of (religious) aesthetics.37 This is also a move beyond an artis-
tic concept of aesthetics in addressing “aesthetic formations” within changing
religious fields;38 we can now ask how religious aesthetic forms meandered into
areas of politics and art, popular culture, science, and the medial represen-
tation of knowledge; and we can scrutinize how religion itself was redefined
in aesthetic terms (such as emotion and experience) as a response to the
rationalization of religion in Enlightenment contexts.39 “Religious aesthetics, in
the current sense, refers to an embodied and embedded praxis through which
subjects relate to other subjects and objects and which is grounded in and
offers the ground for religious experience”.40 In addition to the importance
of praxis – and, I would add, communication – in this understanding of aes-
thetics, it becomes clear that such an approach does not privilege the visual;
rather, it addresses the human sensory apparatus in its entirety.41
    In sum, the referential framework of religious aesthetics allows us to bet-
ter understand the place of the religious in a secular environment. Today, art
is not only a carrier of beauty, but a carrier of truth and meaning, and as such
it has taken over functions that earlier had been associated with the religious
domain. An excellent example of these discursive transfers and reconfigura-
tions is the link between science, occultism, and the art of the Avant-Garde
in the early twentieth century. Around 1900, scientific discoveries such as
n-­dimensionality, x-rays and electromagnetism entered the discourse of


 34.   Beck et al., Reflexive Modernization.
 35.   Rancière, The Politics of Aesthetics.
 36.   Charles Taylor, Sources of the Self; Foucault, Aesthetics, Method, and Epistemology.
 37.   See e.g. Morgan, Visual Piety; Krüger & Nova, Imagination und Wirklichkeit; Lanwerd,
       Religionsästhetik; Meyer, Aesthetic Formations. Most recently, see the special issue of the
       Journal of Religion in Europe 4.1 (2011), devoted to “Relocating Religion(s) – Museality as
       a Critical Term for the Aesthetics of Religion” (guest editors are Jens Kugele and Katharina
       Wilkens).
 38.   Meyer, Aesthetic Formations.
 39.   On the importance of Friedrich Schleiermacher, see Korsch & Griffioen, Interpreting
       Religion.
 40.   Meyer & Verrips, “Aesthetics”, 27 (emphasis original).
 41.   Mohr, “Perception/Sensory System”. See also Charles Hirschkind’s analysis of the cas-
       sette sermons in Islamic discourse and the importance of hearing, Hirschkind, The Ethical
       Soundscape, and Bruce Smith’s analysis of the sound of early modern England, The Acoustic
       World of Early Modern England. See also Schulz, “Soundscape”.


                                                                                              235
kocku von stuckrad