can be regarded as the cultural underground of society. Much
      broader, deeper and historically based than the contemporary
      movement known as the underground, it includes all deviant belief
      systems and their associated practices. Unorthodox science, alien
      and heretical religion, deviant medicine, all comprise elements of
      such an underground.21

   The cultic milieu described by Campbell included networks and seedbeds
of ideas, as well as various authoritative sources and particular groups. Indeed,
the cultic milieu, as understood by Campbell, was essentially “occult culture”.
That is to say, its centre of gravity is modern occultism, magic, and certain
ideas and Easternized themes developed within 1960s countercultural move-
ments. More recently, Jeffrey Kaplan and Heléne Lööw have revisited the
theory, identifying the cultic milieu as a “zone in which proscribed and/or for-
bidden knowledge is the coin of the realm, a place in which ideas, theories and
speculations are to be found, exchanged, modified and, eventually, adopted or
rejected by adherents of countless, primarily ephemeral groups”.22 However,
while Kaplan and Lööw have made creative use of Campbell’s theory and
highlighted its value, they have not, it seems to me, been wholly successful


 18. See, for example, Partridge, “The Occultural Significance of The Da Vinci Code”.
 19. See Partridge & Christianson, The Lure of the Dark Side; Granholm, “‘Sons of Northern
     Darkness’”.
 20. See Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West; Partridge, “Religion and Popular Culture”.
 21. Colin Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and Secularization”, 122 (emphasis original).
 22. Kaplan & Lööw, The Cultic Milieu, 3.


                                                                                          117
christopher partridge



in applying it to the contemporary world. Their attempt to develop the cul-
tic milieu model is essentially Procrustean. Indeed, they themselves seem to
recognize this, in that, in seeking to account for a relatively wide spectrum of
ideas from nature mysticism to spiritual articulations of the gothic, and from
Charles Manson to National Socialism, the theory is being stretched so far
that it is beginning to show cracks:

        Adherents … are not easily diffused through the cultic milieu.
        Racists and neo-Nazis do not easily mix with adherents of radi-
        cal environmental subculture, although the same could be said for
        Black Bloc anarchists and members of mainstream labor unions or
        adherents of the Catholic Church … This observation … points to
        a more complex picture than Campbell envisioned … As those of
        us who have studied the more esoteric reaches of the cultic milieu
        would attest, the milieu is vast.23

However, the picture is, in fact, not only rather more complex than Campbell
realized, but also, I would argue, far vaster and more ubiquitous than that
painted by Kaplan and Lööw. While there is, in the book they edited, a broad
range of ideologies and spiritualities discussed, from the far right to the far
left, they are all “oppositional by nature”24 and, together, constitute a coun-
terculture concerned with hidden and rejected knowledge. Indeed, although
seeking to account for a vast range of ideas that converge and mutate at speed,
Kaplan and Lööw still want to retain a sociological model that theorizes this
enormous diversity as “a single entity”.25 This is, to say the least, problematic.
Although attempting to rethink the milieu in terms of a “vast imaginary land-
scape inhabited by many neighbourhoods”,26 it is clearly being stretched too
far. The cultic milieu theory is currently not fit for purpose.
   Having said that, even if Kaplan and Lööw were able to revise Campbell’s
theory in order to account for the plethora of ideas they have identified, it
would still fail to make sense of the processes of re-enchantment. This is why
we need to think in terms of “occulture” rather than “the cultic milieu”. While
including the oppositional and “heterogeneous assortment” of the cultic
milieu, occulture is less concerned with particular groups, systems of belief
and spiritual practices – although these are important – and much more con-
cerned with the conditions within which particular “lifeworlds”27 are formed

 23.   Ibid., 5.
 24.   Ibid, 3.
 25.   Colin Campbell, “The Cult, the Cultic Milieu and Secularization”, 122.
 26.   Kaplan & Lööw, The Cultic Milieu, 6.
 27.   I am following Jürgen Habermas in my use of the term “lifeworld”. This is important, in
       that it refers to the latent, taken-for-granted core values, beliefs, and understandings about
       who we are, how we relate to others, what the world is like, and how we fit into it. See
       Habermas, Theory of Communicative Action, vol. 2, 113–98.


118
                                                                      occulture is ordinary



and within which plausibility structures28 are shaped. Indeed, we will see that,
from an occultural perspective, there are questions to be asked as to the extent
to which we can speak of an “oppositional counterculture”.29 Hence, while
there are conspicuous areas of continuity between the two theories,30 and
while I am myself indebted to the cultic milieu theory, I am suggesting that
something more ubiquitous, ordinary, and less oppositional is happening. For
this reason, the introduction of the term “culture” is important.
    Of course, while “culture” might be interpreted in any number of ways, as
a composite part of the compound “occulture”, it broadly follows Raymond
Williams’s thesis that “culture is ordinary”.31 Hence, while the use of the term
“occult” in “occulture” suggests the hidden, the exotic and the elite (which,
of course, is a large part of the bookish, secretive, gnostic appeal of much
Western esotericism), the addition of the term “culture” opens up a very dif-
ferent perspective, signifying that which is everyday. It is this latter cultural
dimension that is the key to understanding contemporary occulture. This is,
again, not to deny that there is, within occulture, that which is occult, esoteric,
oppositional, or countercultural, but rather that occulture per se is largely
ordinary and everyday. Again, within the idea of “occulture”, the “occult” is
radically modified by the word “culture”. As a compound, “occulture” suggests
a democratized occult, an open esotericism – “occulture is ordinary”. Again,
it is this very ordinariness of occulture that is not at all clear in discussions of
the cultic milieu, which, we have seen, is described as being “an underground”,
a “zone in which proscribed and/or forbidden knowledge is the coin of the
realm”.32
    Occulture describes certain shared attitudes, values, and practices that
characterize society. While we might think of periods when occultural life-
worlds become particularly conspicuous and influential in terms of re-
enchantment, actually, occulture is never absent. It is, historically, a feature
of all societies. As Kaplan and Lööw have commented of the cultic milieu, the
phenomenon is hardly new:

        That there exists within every society a small but dedicated under-
        ground of true seekers of esoteric and, very often, forbidden knowl-
        edge, is well known. The Middle Ages had its heretics, magicians
        and alchemists whose quests were not unlike those of the seekers
        described by Campbell as inhabiting the cultic milieu.33



 28.   On plausibility structures, see Berger, The Sacred Canopy.
 29.   Kaplan & Lööw, The Cultic Milieu, 1.
 30.   See Partridge, The Re-enchantment of the West, vol. 1, 24–9.
 31.   Raymond Williams, “Culture is Ordinary”.
 32.   Kaplan & Lööw, The Cultic Milieu, 3.
 33.   Ibid., 1.


                                                                                       119
christopher partridge



Therefore, they argue, “the cultic milieu is not a product of the 1960s. Rather,
it is a permanent feature of society – not just this society, but of every society
for which we have historical records”.34 My point is that, while this is true, the
theory of occulture requires that we consider not simply elite, underground
communities with a penchant for the occult and the forbidden, but society
as a whole. For example, not only did the religious values of the Church have
a shaping effect on medieval society and culture, in that, as A. D. Gilbert has
commented, “at all levels of social life and human need the Christian religion
acquired immense and ubiquitous utility in the minds of medieval men”, but
also, at the level of popular consciousness, it actually functioned as “a vast
reservoir of magical power, capable of being deployed for a variety of secular
purposes”.35 This largely Christianized occulture, these synergies of Christian
theology and indigenous folk beliefs, permeated all levels of medieval soci-
ety. Again, evidence for such medieval Christian occulture is clearly evident in
Karen Jolly’s study of elf charms and popular religion in England:

      [I]nvisible powers associated with the Devil afflicted people with
      physical as well as spiritual ailments; hence Christian words of
      power made herbal medicine handed down through classical and
      Germanic lore efficacious against these forces … All of the rem-
      edies show the conjunction of good forces against evil forces with-
      out a necessary distinction between physical and spiritual, natural
      and supernatural … Any material phenomenon had a potential
      spiritual meaning, whether it be a demonic illness or temptation
      testing the resistance of a Christian or a weakness of body designed
      to demonstrate God’s miraculous power.36

Keith Thomas likewise provides evidence for the widespread popular super-
naturalism of the medieval period: