The Depth-Mystical Experience and Its Conceptualizations
The first two denials of genuine mystical knowledge keep everything of
alleged cognitive value within mystical and religious texts themselves. The
third denial—“constructivism”—also has that effect. The way to introduce
this topic is with the role of experience and conceptualization in mystics’
knowledge-claims.
      Even if the mind during a depth-mystical experience is empty of
differentiated content, depth-mystics in classical mystical traditions do
believe these experiences give a sense of fundamental reality, immutability,
and oneness. Thus, something is retained after the experience is over, and
thus mystical experiences may be cognitive of some reality. If mystics
retained nothing whatsoever from depth-mystical experiences, they could
make no claim about the nature of what they experienced and could not
reject any other claims as objectionable. Indeed, if they retained nothing,
they would not claim to have had an experience—they would have been
simply unconscious. What is retained may be a memory of a “pure”
consciousness of being awake and aware, but without any objects of
awareness. But once they return to a dualistic state of consciousness, their
analytical mind kicks in and what was experienced becomes an object of
thought. As such, it must be conceptualized. Ninian Smart highlighted
different degrees of “ramification” of conceptualization: lowly ramified
terms (e.g., “oneness,” “reality”) and highly ramified terms from religious
traditions (e.g., “God,” “Brahman”).6 Highly ramified terms gain their
meaning in part from a range of statements taken to be true for reasons of
theory, while low-ramified terms do not (1965: 79). Thus, even if a
description cannot be totally separated from all interpretation, some
descriptions are closer to the phenomenological givenness of an experience.
But mystics typically write in highly ramified terms. Mystics usually speak
in concrete terms of a specific personal god or a nonpersonal reality rather
than remain on the level of abstract concepts of a generic “Ultimate
Reality.” But even if mystics confined themselves to such abstract terms as
“reality” or “oneness,” these still have a conceptual element and are the
result of seeing what was experienced from a mental distance and through a
conceptual lens after the depth-mystical experience is over.
      If classical depth-mystics are correct, they experience an immutable
reality transcending our natural world, but the reality experienced is
nonetheless open to very different interpretations with values and symbols
from a culture affecting such interpretations. In the West, we typically refer
to spiritual experiences as “experiences of God” because we are raised from
childhood with that concept and it is the only term we know that seems
appropriate. But “God” is not a neutral term for any transcendent reality—a
theistic god has attributes that nonpersonal analogs such as Brahman and
the Way do not, and vice versa. Nevertheless, the brain must affix some
name to anything it experiences to file it into memory (Newberg &
Waldman 2009: 76). But there is a great variety of spiritual experiences, and
most people have their own definition of “God” (ibid.: chap. 4). In addition,
terms from different traditions are not interchangeable—Eckhart’s
“Godhead” and Shankara’s “Brahman” gain their meaning, as all concepts
do, only within the context of a larger system. Early Buddhists translating
Indian texts into Chinese first tried simply substituting Daoist terms for
Buddhist ones, but quickly found that that did not work. Even if the various
terms have the same referent, the referential and descriptive aspects of
concepts cannot be conflated: the concepts behind them may be very
different. The difference between Advaita and Samkhya on the transcendent
“self” is a classic example—the universal atman versus the individual
purusha. So too, most theists would dispute the claim that the depth-
mystical experience is an experience of a fundamentally nonpersonal reality
rather than of a personal being even if nontheists use the word “God.”
     After their experiences, members of different religious traditions see
the depth-mystical experience differently, and beliefs and values from
outside the depth-experience must fill out the significance given to the
experience. But because the competing conceptions are equally well-
supported experientially (as discussed in the next chapter), it is hard to
conclude that these more-specific beliefs somehow come from the
experience itself or that any type of mystical experience is evidence for one
interpretation over another. Even if all mystics in different traditions
experience at least the source of the experiencer’s beingness, mystics still
differ on their understanding of the full nature of what is experienced, and
their interpretations in terms of different highly ramified conceptions of
transcendent realities conflict. So too, if no transcendent reality is involved
and mystics experience only the root beingness of a natural self or merely
the sheer “thatness” of the aware mind, this reality is still open to different
interpretations in different metaphysical systems.7
     One may argue that theists and nontheists experience different aspects
of the same reality, as with the simile of the blind men and the elephant (as
discussed in the next chapter). But if the mind is truly empty of all
differentiating content during the depth-mystical experience, this is hard to
argue: there are no different aspects to this one experience. The absence of
differentiated features would make it is hard not to conclude that depth-
mystics in all traditions all experience the same reality but interpret the
depth-mystical experience differently according to their tradition after they
have returned to a dualistic consciousness. In the postexperience dualistic
state of consciousness, what was previously experienced now must be seen
even by the mystics themselves as an object of some sort—in this state, the
mind makes what was experienced into one more mental object among
other mental objects. Understanding the depth-mystical experience becomes
subject to the same problems in understanding other phenomena for mystics
themselves. But the experience itself does apparently remain empty of
differentiated content.
      Nevertheless, Christians often argue that Christians’ depth-mystical
experiences are phenomenologically unique. One argument is that mystical
experiences cannot be forced or earned but are the result of God’s grace—
God just happens to bestow by his grace a glimpse of himself more often on
those who were cultivating mystical experiences. But mystics of all
traditions, theistic and nontheistic, agree that these experiences are not the
product of human effort: the experience cannot be forced, but requires
letting go of the sense of self. Some mystical experiences do occur
spontaneously, but training that increases the possibility also occurs.
Christian contemplatives too engage in spiritual training and prepare the
way with effort and do not rely exclusively on grace. If no mystical
experiences occurred in other traditions but always occurred spontaneously
for Christians, an argument might be made on these grounds, but this is not
the case. And, as noted above, nothing suggests that non-Christians have a
substantively different depth-mystical experience.
      Another argument is that in the depth-mystical experience for
Christians some distinctive residual sense of a loving, powerful, and
personal being is retained from the experience itself and is not simply a
result of differentiated theistic introvertive mystical experiences or of the
transitional state back to the baseline state of consciousness or of a
theological interpretation applied after the experience. But again, if the
experience is truly devoid of all differentiable content and all intentionality
is cut off, this is not possible—there cannot be a loving relationship while
the mind is “empty.” As John of the Cross says, it is an “imageless”
communion. Of course, if Christians on the path to enlightenment believe
that they are being carried upward by love, then they will naturally interpret
any resulting experiences in terms of a loving reality. Thus, while the
different forms of Christian mysticism may be unique, this is no reason to
conclude that there is a unique “Christian depth-mystical experience” of a
loving, personal triune transcendent reality or that non-Christians or at least
nontheists experience some other reality.