Can One Mystical System Be Established as Best?
Thus, mystical knowledge-claims do appear to be incompatible and
genuinely to conflict, not merely diverge. Conflicting and irreconcilable
claims per se do not rule out one mystical system being better than others if
there is a procedure to resolve the disputes in favor of one system. So can
we justify one set of mystical doctrines as epistemically superior? How we
justify any beliefs is itself a thorny issue in philosophy, but two possibilities
can be quickly dismissed. First, even if there are cross-cultural standards of
rationality or neutral experiential evidence, there still are different premises
in different cultures and no agreement on how the standards and evidence
should be utilized in arguments. Different traditions characterize problems
and solutions differently. For example, taking historical events as valuable
is integral to Jewish and Christian traditions, but that area of concern is
screened out in traditional Indian mysticism, where escaping the cycle of
rebirths is central. Beliefs ground the ways of life, and the beliefs on what is
real conflict. For example, for Christians who take the incarnation of Christ
as the central event of history (e.g., Zaehner 1970: 31), any view that
ignores that in characterizing our situation is not being objective. Second,
the religious may see revelations as exempt from all the problems of human
reasoning and experiences. But the appeal to revelations presents its own
issues: the very idea of accepting revelations as cognitive would itself have
to be defended against naturalism; various revelations around the world
themselves conflict, and there does not appear to be a neutral way of
resolving this conflict or testing a revelation rather than relying ultimately
on faith; accepting revelations involves relying on the experiences of others,
unlike in mysticism where in principle each person can have his or her own
experience; and reasons would have to be advanced for ruling out a
tradition such as Buddhism that rejects all revelations.23
      If we limit the question of justification to only whether there is a way
within the resources of mysticism alone, is there a way to adjudicate one set
of mystical beliefs as better or best? One proposed test is psychological
well-being. But introvertive mystical experiences do not have a uniformly
positive psychological effect on all people: not all who have had mystical
experiences turn out healthier or live more effectively in the natural world.
One can also have a depth-mystical experience without it affecting one’s
psyche: if one is neurotic before, one may well remain neurotic afterward.
So too, mystical experiences may have negative effects if they are
spontaneous and unexpected: if one is not prepared for them, the shock can
be disturbing. Meditation also can end up aggravating negative mental
conditions and personality traits. And to naturalists, any positive effects are
irrelevant to the question of insight: any positive character changes merely
indicate that mystics believe they are in contact with a transcendent reality,
not necessarily that they actually are.
      Thus, psychological well-being fails as a test for the genuineness of
mystical experience. William James proposed a similar pragmatic test for
determining true mystical doctrines (1958: 368): if a mystical experience
produces positive results in how one leads one’s life, then the experience is
authentic and the way of life one follows is vindicated (and so the teachings
leading to a positive life are correct). In short, the “truth” of one’s beliefs is
shown by one’s life as a whole.24 The criterion goes back to the Bible: Jesus
spoke of recognizing a false prophet by the fruits he bears (Matthew 7:15–
20), and Paul spoke of the “harvest of the Spirit”—“love, joy, peace,
patience, kindness, goodness, fidelity, gentleness, and self-control”
(Galatians 5:22). Christian mystics have often used this criterion—e.g.,
Teresa of Avila said that one can tell if an experience comes from God or
the Devil by its fruits in actions and personality (along with the vividness of
the memory of the experience, conformity to Christian scripture, and
confirmation by superiors). For her, humility and charity result from an
authentic God-given experience. More recently, John Hick also made much
of an ethical criterion and “saint-making” in his pluralism (1989: 316–42).
      However, the “fruits” test has problems. As discussed in chapter 9,
mystical experiences need not make a person moral or more socially active:
while all enlightened mystics shift toward selflessness, not all enlightened
mystics fill their newly found selflessness with a moral concern for others
—the enlightened cannot be ego-centered, but they can exhibit a “holy
indifference” to the welfare of others. In addition, positive actions toward
others may simply reflect the doctrines and values of one’s own religion.
This criterion was proposed by Christians and the specifics reflect
traditional Christian values. Thus, it may end up being a criterion internal to
only some traditions rather than a neutral criterion applicable across
cultures. For example, some traditions do not value this-worldly concerns
centrally. In Jainism, the ideal for the enlightened is to stop harming any
creature and thus to take no actions at all, leading to their death by
starvation: how is this proof that they are not enlightened or had no mystical
experiences? Certainly not just because it conflicts with Christian values for
an enlightened way of life. So too, most mystics try to conform to the
orthodoxy of their tradition because they think their tradition is the best, and
so the enlightened may simply follow their tradition’s values and factual
beliefs that they have internalized. (But there are antinomian mystics in
every tradition.) If so, we cannot see mystical experiences as validating one
tradition’s doctrines. The nonreligious who unexpectedly have spontaneous
mystical experiences may also only reflect the values of their cultures in
their understanding. So too, emotional types of fruit—e.g., joy, calmness,
equanimity—also can arise whether one has had a mystical experience or
not and also whether a mystic has experienced a transcendent reality or not.
That is, psychological or physiological well-being may result simply from
the mind being emptied of worries and other stressful content by focusing
solely on the present and not from an experience of a transcendent reality.
      Thus, the “fruits” test cannot be seen as an independent test for any
mystical doctrines. The criterion may be applied only in a question-begging
way favoring one tradition’s values. Other traditions may propose other
criteria for what are the best mystical doctrines that would favor their own
traditions. Indeed, it is difficult to imagine one set of neutral criteria or
procedures to determine one set of mystical doctrines as supreme that does
not reflect the contingent values of one tradition or another. In the end, what
is accepted as a true doctrine turns on theological criteria rather than the
phenomenological content of the experiences themselves or any neutral
criterion internal to the practice of mysticism generally.
        Is It Rational to Accept Mystical Knowledge-Claims?
If we accept that no set of mystical knowledge-claims can be established in
any neutral way to be superior to others, we must accept that no mystical
knowledge-claims can be proven in the sense that it would be irrational for
anyone familiar with the issues of natural explanations and competing sets
of mystical knowledge-claims to reject a set of such claims. But can we at
least determine if it is rational for mystics themselves or for nonmystics to
hold their doctrines based on mystical experiences?25 That is, can we lower
the bar from trying to establish the truth of particular mystical doctrines or
to convince others to accept one’s claims to merely establishing that it is
rational to hold some mystical doctrines? This divides into two questions.
Is it rational for mystics themselves to count their own experiences as
evidence for the basic doctrines they hold?26 And is it rational for
nonmystics to accept the mystical experiences of others as evidence for
their tradition’s doctrines?
      What exactly being “rational” is is a matter of debate. It used to be
considered irrational in philosophy to believe something without solid proof
or if it was not at least beyond a “reasonable” doubt; now, believing
something is considered rational as long as one does not hold inconsistent
beliefs or defy well-established evidence. (Today few philosophers are strict
evidentialists for questions other than religion.) Rationality in this sense is
holding a set of logically consistent beliefs (which is harder to do than it
sounds), showing that one’s beliefs are well-grounded experientially, and
giving plausible reasons for holding the beliefs and for countering criticism.
One must also be willing to change one’s beliefs. One’s beliefs should also
be consistent with what is accepted as the best knowledge available,
including established scientific theories.27
      The first question is whether it is rational for mystics themselves to
count their experiences as evidence for the doctrines they hold. (If the
depth-mystical experience were truly empty, it would be irrational to treat it
as evidence of anything. But as discussed, it is not truly empty: a sense of
reality, oneness, and fundamentality is usually retained.) The chief
argument in its favor is the traditional “argument from agreement”—i.e.,
mystics from around the world converge on the same claims, once we
discount the differences in expressions due to cultural differences.28 In
William James’s words, there is an “eternal unanimity” among mystics
(1958: 321). But even in we can get around the naturalist explanations of
the sameness of mystical experiences of each type, this argument runs
aground on the hard fact of religious diversity: as with the argument from
religious experience, religious theorists must twist other religion’s
conceptions and doctrines in order to fabricate an “agreement.” In a circular
argument, we end up with an artificial consensus based on some theological
position. At best, this might support a general entailed claim of the
existence of transcendent realities, but such an agreement cannot support
the concrete realities of the doctrines of any specific tradition.
      The other arguments in favor are the principle of credulity and the
analogy to sense-experience discussed above. Under these, mystical
experiences are innocent until proven guilty—i.e., it is rational to accept
them until the mechanisms of mystical experiences are shown to be
unreliable or disqualified for rational acceptance by other considerations.
But problems with the principle of credulity and the analogy to sense-
experience were presented above.
      Of course, the rationality of a practice does not establish the truth of
its claims—it can be rational to hold a belief at the time that later turns out
to be false when further evidence is gathered. So too, being rational in
holding one set of beliefs does not entail that those holding other beliefs
must be irrational—different rational people can draw different conclusions
from the same evidence. William Alston (1991) holds that it is rational for
Christians to regard the Christian mystical practice as sufficiently reliable to
be the source of prima facie justification for the Christian beliefs it
engenders, and so, in the absence of stronger evidence to the contrary,
Christian mystical perception should be accepted as a reliable cognitive
access to God and the foundation for other beliefs. But he admits that
Hindus and Buddhists are just as rational in engaging in their own socially
established doxastic practices, even though these three traditions are
incompatible in their claims (ibid.: 274–75). The doxastic justification
makes the claim to the equal rationality of all mystics fairly easy to
establish—in fact, it is hard not to be rational by Alston’s criterion of an
established social practice that we do not have sufficient reason for
regarding as unreliable (ibid.: 6), since each tradition has responded
extensively to the scrutiny and criticism of opponents over a long period of
time and natural explanations do not at this time refute all mysticism.
      Each tradition would thus be rational to engage in by Alston’s
standard. In addition, there is no independent non-question-begging way to
establish that one tradition’s doxastic practices are more reliable for getting
at the truth than its competitors, and so all established practices would be
equally rational and well-informed epistemic peers: each has the same or
relevantly similar experiences, each is aware of criticism and alternative
positions, each produces impressive arguments, and each ends up with well-
reasoned positions. Among such peers, no position is more likely to be
correct. In short, all mystics who have produced coherent sets of mystical
beliefs are epistemically equal. Yet epistemic peers can disagree. They can
reasonably draw different—even conflicting—conclusions from the same
evidence. The result is an irresolvable relativism. Alston concludes that
“though it is not epistemically the best of all possible worlds, it is rational in
this situation for one to continue to participate in the (undefeated) practice
in which s/he is involved, hoping that the inter-practice contradictions will
be sorted out in due time” (ibid.: 7).
      But this presents a problem. Each mystic has evidence privately
available only to him- or herself, and the result is a conflict of claims.
Alston’s approach does not provide any rational way to prefer one tradition
over another or any way to adjudicate the conflicting knowledge-claims.
His approach is purely defensive. And Alston also has to admit that the
diversity of outputs from religions that are not consistent does lessen the
rationality of all mystical practices (1991: 275). Indeed, the substantive
inconsistencies between traditions undermine the very idea that mystical
experiences are at all reliable as a basis of belief-forming in general—the
beliefs of different traditions still conflict, and if one set is correct, then
most multiple doctrines on each given point must be false. Mystics typically
advance highly ramified concepts and doctrines: if these conflict, how can
we treat any of the doctrines as claims warranted by expert testimony? This
undercuts the rationality of accepting (as Ninian Smart [1965] does) that the
diverge doctrines at least justify the broader, less ramified claim that there is
a transcendent reality even if we do not know what it is. In addition, there is
divergence even within Christian mystical practices themselves—as Alston
realizes (1991: 192–94)—and this is itself a major problem: if these
practices cannot converge even within one tradition, the rationality of
mysticism is even more severely challenged. Alston speaks of the “practical
rationality” of engaging in any socially established doxastic practice that
one does not have sufficient reasons for regarding as unreliable (ibid.: 168)
since there is no noncircular way to distinguish between different reliable
doxastic practices. And as a practical matter, we all of course do have to
choose how to live. But once the religious know of the variety of socially
established but conflicting mystical practices, there is the issue of the
arbitrariness in their choice, and labeling adherence to the tradition one
grew up in as “practical rationality” or “the most reasonable course of
action” does not get around this.
      However, the threshold for rationality is low enough that we can
conclude that mystics can rationally accept the knowledge-claims of their
tradition based on their experiences even without the hope that the
interpractice contradictions will be resolved someday. (So too, for similar
reasons naturalists are rational in rejecting all transcendent mystical
knowledge-claims.) Introvertive mystics themselves can rationally accept
their own experiences as cognitive of a transcendent reality until a
successful natural reduction of mystical experiences is established or until
transcendent knowledge-claims are shown to be incoherent. (Whether a
scientific explanation of the mechanisms of a mystical experience can ever
in principle be grounds to reject mystical claims will be an issue in the next
chapter.) Thus, it is rational today for introvertive mystics to believe that
they have had an experience of a transcendent reality if they have a set of
coherent and well-grounded beliefs. (Advaita is a favorite target for the
claim of incoherence.29) The diversity of competing and equally well-
established mystical ways of life and interpretations of what is experienced
does eviscerate the idea that these experiences can uniquely support the
knowledge-claims of any particular mystical tradition and so lessens the
degree of confidence any mystic can have in his or her doctrines.
Nevertheless, it does not make it irrational to hold them if their claims are
rationally defendable. It is rational, for example, to hold “I believe I have
experienced God, even though I know that I might be deluding myself” or
to hold “I believe the doctrines of my tradition, even though I accept that
you are just as rationally justified in holding the doctrines of your tradition
that conflict with mine.”
      In sum, it is rational today for mystics in established traditions to
accept their claims as cognitive. But are those who have not had mystical
experiences rationally justified in accepting mystics’ experiences as
evidence for holding the doctrines of their own tradition? Or do mystics
have a greater epistemic warrant than do nonmystics? William James
believed that mystical states are “absolutely authoritative” for those who
have had them but not for those who have not (1958: 324, 382, 414, 422,
424): the experiences are so vivid for the experiencer that the problem of
religious diversity is an issue only for nonmystics. But if the knowledge is
authoritative only for the experiencer, is it not “subjective” in the pejorative
sense? How does the vividness counter the epistemic issues when the same
experience is just as vivid for mystics holding conflicting doctrines? The
experience may be so overwhelming that one is no longer concerned with
conflicting doctrines, but that is only a matter of emotion—it is not
epistemic grounds for rejecting the doctrines of others. That is, the
vividness of the experience or an intense sense of reality or knowledge does
bear psychologically on wanting to hold one’s beliefs, but it does not add
anything epistemically once one knows that others with the same
experience and the same sense of overwhelming intensity hold conflicting
beliefs. Prior to being aware of other traditions being “live options,” to use
William James’s phrase, it may have been rational to hold one’s own
mystical beliefs as in a class superior to all others, but once one realizes that
others are in the same epistemic situation, one cannot rationally treat one’s
own interpretation as privileged without further argument.
      Richard Swinburne believes that under the principles of credulity and
testimony it is rational for nonmystics to accept mystical experiences as
veridical until the mechanisms for the experiences are shown to be
unreliable (1991). But nonmystics would have to rely on other persons’
testimony concerning their private experiences for support for their own
beliefs. In addition, the mystics’ private experiences are not the same in
character as the sense-experiences of nonmystics and are open to more
possible objections that would show that mystics are mistaken and hence
may defeat the mystics’ claims. Thus, nonmystics must make a leap of faith
in accepting mystics’ testimony that they do not have to make in accepting
a reliable observer when only sense-experience is involved. And having to
rely on another’s testimony does lessen the degree of the rationality in
accepting mystical claims: as James would agree, nonmystics would not
have the assurance that comes from actually drinking water rather than
merely accepting the claim that water quenches thirst based on others’
experiences. Moreover, why is a nonmystical Christian entitled to accept
mystical experiences as evidence of their doctrines over other tradition’s
doctrines? They do not have grounds to believe that Christian mystics are
more reliable than mystics in other traditions, who presumably have the
same experiences and yet hold conflicting doctrines.
      In sum, the presence of competing doctrines brings into question the
epistemic right of all believers, whether they have had a mystical
experience or not, to say that their tradition’s interpretations must be better
than others’. That at least lowers the degree of rationality for mystics and
nonmystical believers alike.30 In general, the rationality of both groups is
on the same footing: since mystical claims are made in a web of arguments,
it should be as rational for those who have not had the experiences but
accept that others have had them to affirm the tradition’s claims that are
ultimately agreed on—mystics are not in a better position on the final
developed claims. Even if nonmystics have a different understanding of a
tradition’s doctrines (e.g., seeing God as a transcendent object comparable
in some way to phenomenal objects), they can still accept that mystics have
experienced that reality.
      Another issue is this: can one set of doctrines be established as
inherently more rational than others?31 Probably not. First, no doctrine is
inherently rational but depends on the other beliefs and evidence—it was
once rational to believe the earth was flat and unmoving, but in light of new
evidence it no longer is. Second, it is hard to establish one rational mystical
set of doctrines as being more rational to hold than another, i.e., that it is
better established either experientially or by reasons, in light of the
doctrinal conflicts over acceptable arguments. If beliefs are well-grounded
experientially and coherent, that as a practical matter is the end of the
matter. In principle, there may be better reasons and evidence for holding
one set of beliefs than another, but trying to establish such superiority
would quickly dissolve into a matter of competing metaphysics with no
resolution possible between those who accept different basic principles. We
are not in a position to present transcendent realities for examination. Thus,
anyone can remain confident that no other doxastic practice will be
established as rationally superior to one’s own rational practices. But that
many mystical doxastic practices can be shown to be rational does lessen
the rationality of adhering to the doctrines of any one.