Extrovertive Mystical Experiences
The first important distinction is between the two classes of mystical
experience: “extrovertive” and “introvertive”—i.e., those with sensory
input and those without. Extrovertive experiences, like introvertive
experiences, have an “inner” dimension, but the two classes differ in the
reality experienced. A mystical quest may lead an experiencer to an
extrovertive sense of a connectedness to or unity with the flux of
impermanent phenomena that can be seen when our mind is free of our
conceptual, dispositional, and emotional apparatuses. Extrovertive mystical
experiences involve a passive receptivity to what is presented in sensory
events—indeed, a greater openness in general (MacLean et al. 2011). They
may give a sense of a transcendent reality immanent in nature. All
extrovertive mystical experiences involve differentiated content. Thus,
these states are “dualistic” in the sense that there are diffuse phenomena
present in consciousness even if such phenomena are not seen as a
collection of ontologically distinct entities. Mystical experiences with
differentiated content have something for the mind to organize with the
concepts from a mystic’s culture. But one state of consciousness may be
free of all conceptualizations: a “pure” mindfulness involving sensory
differentiations but not any conceptualizations.
     Also note that the extrovertive mysticism remains this-worldly: its
experiences are of the natural realm. These mystical experiences produce an
alleged insight into the ultimate construction of the dynamic world of
change, including in some a sense of a transcendent source within the
world. But even if there is a sense of a transcendent reality immanent in the
natural realm, the natural world is still the locus of the experience. What is
retained from all extrovertive mystical experiences is a sense of
fundamental beingness, immutability, and oneness. Thus, not all mystical
experiences involve delving into the changeless transcendent source of
being but can involve an experience of the beingness of “surface”
phenomena. Since both types of mystical experience involve an emptying
of the mind, it may seem natural to consider extrovertive experiences as
simply low-level, failed, or partial cases of introvertive mystical
experiences, but they are a distinct type of experience with different
physiological effects in which the mind still has sensory content. Buddhism
and Daoism are traditions in which extrovertive experiences are considered
more central than introvertive ones for aligning one’s life with reality.
     Especially prominent among extrovertive states are the spontaneous
experiences of the natural world of “nature mysticism” or “cosmic
consciousness.” In the former, the sensory realm may be transfigured. To
William Blake, it is “To see a World in a Grain of Sand / And a Heaven in a
Wild Flower, / Hold Infinity in the palm of your hand / And Eternity in an
Hour.” Nature may take on a vivid glow as if alive. Or there may be the
presence in the world of a transcendent god outside of time in an “eternal
now.” A sense of a transcendent reality grounding the universe may be part
of an experience and not merely an inference made after the experience is
over. This is a shift from nature mysticism to a cosmic consciousness.
Richard M. Bucke presented the classic account of the latter (1969; see also
Rankin 2008). They have in one degree or another a lessening of a sense of
self and of any boundaries between the experiencer and nature and also of
boundaries within nature set up by our analytical mind, leading to a sense of
connectedness or partless unity (“oneness”) of oneself with all of nature.
(Interestingly, these experiences are more often reported in the West than in
South Asia.) They can lead to a sense of the living presence of a timeless
reality of light and love that is immanent to the natural world. Both types of
experiences come in various degrees of intensity, but there is always a
profound sense of connectedness with the natural world, of knowledge, and
of contact with something fundamentally real. The event may be a short
experience or a longer-lasting state of consciousness.
      Paul Marshall describes extrovertive “noumenal experiences” as
perfectly clear, luminous, highly noetic, fully detailed, and temporally
inclusive, unlike ordinary sense-experience (2005: 267). He concludes that
in the simplest extrovertive mystical experiences, the noumenal background
is not felt strongly: the stream of phenomenal experience becomes nondual
through a relaxation of sharp self/other distinctions, so that the everyday
self and the body are felt to be an integral part of the stream; this brings a
sense of unity, perceptual clarity, living in the “now,” peace, and joy, but no
dramatic transformations of phenomena. In more developed cases, the
phenomenal stream begins to reveal its noumenal bedrock, bringing
luminous transfigurations of the phenomenal content, more advanced
feelings of unity, a growing sense of meaning and knowledge, and a
significantly altered sense of time. In the most advanced cases, the
noumenal background comes to the fore, blotting out dualistic phenomenal
experience altogether, and the mystics experience an all-encompassing
unity, knowledge, a cosmic vision, eternity, and love, having accessed the
depths of their own minds (ibid.). Marshall explains extrovertive
experiences by combining realism and idealism: nature is externally real but
mental in nature (ibid.: 261–68). But his approach places introvertive
mystical experiences with differentiated content in the same class as
extrovertive experiences.