Weighting Mystical Experiences
Also notice that the depth-mystical experience has been interpreted to fit
into radically different metaphysics. Contrary to popular opinion, not all
mystics endorse Advaita’s nonduality of realities. The Samkhya dualism of
matter (prakriti) and consciousness and a pluralism of persons (purushas)
was previously noted. Theists have incorporated the depth-experience in
two different ways—unison with God’s will or experiencing the ground of
the self—while retaining the reality of persons and the distinction between
creator and creation. Nor need the depth-experience be weighted more than
introvertive theistic experiences or extrovertive experiences when it comes
to cognitive value and metaphysics. Buddhists generally weight the insights
of extrovertive mindfulness as cognitively more important than those of
introvertive mystical experiences, including the depth-experience of
“neither perception nor nonperception” in concentrative meditation: seeing
phenomenal realm “as it really is” is the reality/truth of highest matters
(paramartha-satya). That is more important for their soteriological concern
with suffering (duhkha) than any relation of the individual or the natural
world to any purported transcendent reality. Zhuangzi’s Daoism is another
tradition that has both introvertive and extrovertive mystical experiences
but gives more weight to the latter (see Roth 2000).
      Theists may or may not weight the depth-mystical experience as the
most important ontic insight. For theistic mystics, a personal reality remains
most fundamental: there is a self-emptying source of the world’s being—a
personal god or a nonpersonal, silent, inactive ground like the Godhead of
Eckhart’s Neoplatonist-influenced system. Theistic mystics may value
introvertive theistic experiences over “empty” depth-mystical experiences.
They may also argue that theistic mystics experience one aspect of a
personal divinity and nontheistic mystics experience another, nonpersonal
aspect of the same god devoid of all differentiable content (i.e., only God’s
own beingness). Or theists may dismiss the depth-experience as
noncognitive, treating it as naturalists generally do as a useless spinning of
the wheels when the mind is empty of content. Of course, the theists’
interpretation is disputed by nontheists. Advaitins invert the order and place
all differentiated experiences, including theistic introvertive ones, on a
lower plane: all differentiated experiences involve an incomplete emptying
of the mind of dualistic content, and only emptying the mind completely
leads to the final insight into the nature of reality. They can treat positive
and negative numinous experiences and theistic mystical experiences as
projections of the unenlightened mind, including forces in the subconscious.
To them, only the nonpersonal Brahman is ontologically real, with theistic
experiences being at most a misreading of its nature. But nothing within the
depth-experiences themselves can support either view phenomenologically
if such experiences are devoid of differentiable content.
      Theists may also contend that revelations and other numinous
experiences offer deeper insights into what is experienced in depth-mystical
experiences—the depth-mystical experiences, in effect, only clear the mind
for an infusion of love or other content from God. (The Hindu qualified
nondualist Vedantist Ramanuja also appears to have held that the depth-
mystical experience is a necessary prerequisite to the theistic mystical
experience.) Theistic mystics may also value a continuing extrovertive
sense of the presence of God over any introvertive experiences. The
medieval Christian Richard Rolle valued the “ravishment without
abstention of the senses” over the “ravishment involving abstention from
the bodily senses,” since even sinners can have the latter but the former is a
rapture of love coming from God. The Christian philosopher Michael
Stoeber takes any theistic mystical experiences occurring after the depth-
mystical experience to be higher in importance than depth-mystical
experiences or theistic mystical experiences occurring before the depth-
experience, calling them “theo-monistic experiences” (1994). But nothing
in the mystical texts suggests that these theistic experiences are
qualitatively different, any more than the paranormal experiences that
allegedly occur after a depth-mystical experience are qualitatively different.
Even if the depth-experience clears the mind for other mystical and
nonmystical experiences, nothing suggests that it changes the character of
those experiences, since either way the theistic introvertive mystical
experience completely fills the mind of the experiencer during the
experience and replaces other states of consciousness. Nor does the
transformation of personality in enlightenment appear to be grounds for a
change in the character of the “empty” depth-mystical experiences.
      In sum, either before or after a depth-mystical experience or
enlightenment, mystics may have experiences that theists will see as the
presence of a loving god. Indeed, the process of emptying oneself of a sense
of self may make it easier for theistic and nontheistic differentiated
introvertive experiences to occur. (Whether they actually involve a god or
not is an issue for chapter 3.) As noted, theistic mystics may attach more
cognitive significance to differentiated introvertive mystical experiences
than to depth-mystical experiences. However, theorists in every religious
tradition will need to rank the different types of experiences, and ranking
either mystical experiences or numinous experiences as a greater insight
into a transcendent reality will depend on factors outside the mystical and
numinous experiences themselves. Indeed, that the depth-mystical
experience is taken to be an insight at all—rather than merely a powerful
exotic but totally natural mental state with interesting psychological or
physiological effects—depends on factors outside the experience. Thus, in
the end any judgment on what such experience reveal will depend on
factors other than mystical experiences themselves.
                                       2

           Mystical Knowledge and Religious Ways of Life