Do Mystical Knowledge-Claims Genuinely Conflict?
So it is reasonable to assume that mystical knowledge-claims can be
compared cross-culturally. The next question is: do they really conflict or
are they reconcilable? The basic controversy for extrovertive mysticism is
over whether God is present or not, but the discussion here will be limited
to the matter of introvertive mystical experiences. Prima facie, mystical
claims do conflict: they are all about the same alleged realities (a
transcendent self, the source of the world), and they are incompatible and so
cannot all be true. Thus, they compete. If presented with a genuine conflict,
mystics should reject competing claims from other traditions, just as
classical mystics would reject naturalism. But it is often noted that mystics
share a friendly camaraderie with mystics from other traditions. They may
simply not want to dispute the proper interpretation of mystical experiences
with friends. Or no matter how confident they are in their own doctrines,
they may have less overall confidence in any human conceptualizations and
so be less inclined to argue with others over them. Today they may become
less dogmatic when they become aware of the epistemic problems
connected to mystical claims or become more aware of the variety of viable
mystical beliefs. Or they may not be overly concerned with doctrines. So
too, being “selfless” may make them less confrontational in general.
     But this does not negate the doctrinal differences or mean that mystics
believe that doctrines do not matter or that all doctrines are really the same.
For example, the Christian Thomas Merton, while valuing his Buddhist
friends, placed all Asian mysticism within “the order of nature” and below
theistic mysticism, although he believed that God is involved in all genuine
mystical experiences. Classical mystics tended to see their own view as
“correct” or “best” or “closest to the truth” or “least inadequate,” even if
they denied that any descriptions of transcendent realities are possible and
believed that there is more to a transcendent reality than they have
experienced. And they contested other doctrines. Formal debates in India
between schools included disputes on mystical doctrines. Many of the
writings of such major Advaitins and Buddhists as Shankara and Nagarjuna
are against other schools (including those within their own tradition) as
they try to show how their own views are better and how the others are
wrong.19 Shankara likened dualists who oppose him to deluded fools (Jones
2014c: 72). The Buddhist Aryadeva was supposedly killed by a disciple of
another Buddhist he had just defeated in a debate (Jones 2011b: 187), and
Shankara supposedly died from a curse from another teacher. In Japan, the
great Zen master Dogen rejected the view that all religions teach the same
thing in different forms as un-Buddhist. Also in Japan the Buddhist
Nichiren called for the suppression of other Buddhist groups, and monks
warred with each other. Tantric sects most often were hostile toward other
Tantric sects. Christian, Jewish, and Muslim mystics typically did not
believe in the soteriological efficacy of other traditions. Some Christian
mystics also supported the Crusades and Inquisition. If the mystics’ claims
were only about the phenomenology of the experiences themselves rather
than about what is allegedly experienced, there would not be so much of a
problem, but mysticism is not about these experiences but about aligning
one’s life with the way things really are, and this makes doctrines about the
nature of what was experienced central and the subject of sectarian
disputes.
      Some classical mystics have held that “all streams lead to the same
ocean” (i.e., all mystical paths lead to the same goal) or, to quote Jalal al-
din Rumi, that “the lamps are many, but the light is one” (i.e., all mystical
teachings have the same content). In the modern West, these ideas were
advanced by Neo-Vedanists beginning with Ramakrishna. This has led
some philosophers and theologians today to argue that mystical knowledge-
claims really do not conflict. One innovative solution is a “multiple
realities” approach: theistic and nontheistic introvertive mystics experience
different transcendent realities—theists experience a theistic god, and
nontheists experience a nonpersonal beingness or a self. This goes part way
toward reconciling competing claims. However, disputes about the
attributes of the fundamental reality persist: theists still insist that, for
example, Advaitins are wrong about the ultimate source of God and the
phenomenal world being nonpersonal and the world being purposeless.
Assuming there is only one transcendent reality and making depth-mystical
experiences merely an experience of the beingness of God or the Godhead
also leads to the same conflict over what properties are ultimately most
basic. So too, if there is only one creator or sustainer god, different theistic
traditions could still disagree over his attributes. So too, the relation of
apparently multiple selves to one transcendent reality remains an issue.
      Another modern attempt at reconciliation places all religious traditions
in a “perennial philosophy” framework. Perennial philosophers handle the
mystics’ apparently conflicting claims by accepting a pluralism of paths all
leading to the same summit or different idioms expressing the same truth
(Schuon 1975; Smith 1976; Nasr 1993).20 All religions are “true” in the
sense that each religion is an effective means to experiencing the same
transcendent reality, even if no specific doctrine is the final truth. Perennial
philosophers argue that all traditions have distinct and unique “exoteric”
shells but the same “esoteric” core, like a spectrum of colored lights arising
from one common white light. They propose a metaphysical scheme with
an unmoving Godhead at the center emanating spirit, minds, and lastly
matter. They then interpret all religious doctrines in light of this scheme.
Outside of perennial philosophy, the moderate constructivist John Hick
(1989) proposed a “Copernican revolution” for the relation of religions,
with all religious conceptions orbiting the “Real” in the center. This leads to
a Kantian-inspired pluralism without the elaborate metaphysical overlay of
perennial philosophy but having a similar effect. These thinkers argue that
the Real is beyond all our categories and is experienced differently
depending on the religious context of a particular person. All veridical
religious experiences of the Real are “true,” but we cannot get behind the
different “masks” of experience and know the Real-in-itself. Thus, the Real-
in-itself is not personal or nonpersonal, moral or nonmoral, one or many,
and so on—these masks are only categories imposed on it in different
cultures. To use an analogy from science: we never know an electron-in-
itself; an electron appears as a particle or as a wave depending on which
experimental setup scientists employ; we can never see an electron as it is
in itself, outside of our experiments; whatever it is in itself remains a
mystery—it is not a particle or a wave, but something capable of
manifesting these phenomena when we interact with it in different ways.
Similarly, mystics experience the Real differently depending on their
religious and philosophical beliefs, but the Real-in-itself remains a mystery.
So is what happens to us after death. Thus, each classical mystic is wrong in
believing that his or her view is better than others: all views are imperfect
and dependent on human beliefs.
      The root-metaphor for this position goes back to the Middle Eastern
and Indian parable of a group of blind men who touch different parts of an
elephant and mistakenly conclude from their limited perspectives that they
know what an elephant is. In one common version, one man touches the
elephant’s side and concludes it is a wall; a second man touches a tusk and
concludes it must be a spear; a third feels the trunk and concludes it is a
snake; a fourth touches a leg and concludes it must be a tree; a fifth man
feels the elephant’s ear and the breeze it makes and concludes it is a fan;
and a sixth man grasps the tail and concludes it is a rope. The observers
laugh, and the men quarrel, each insisting that he alone is correct, and
eventually fight. The moral of the parable is not that a transcendent reality
has different parts that different mystics experience, but that mystics are
wrong in drawing final conclusions about its true nature from their own
direct experiences. Similarly, perennial philosophers and pluralists require
all religious believers to admit that their formulations are wrong in some
fundamental sense because they do not know the Real-in-itself. All
depictions are penultimate at best. Like Kant’s noumena, the Real-in-itself
is an unknowable mystery, and we have to accept the limited value of any
formulation. Thus, those who argue for a pluralism as the proper epistemic
relation between religious claims usually stress skepticism about doctrines
and a radical ineffable mystery at the core of things.
      Perennial philosophy and pluralism may satisfy modern liberal
believers, but these approaches must revise traditional mysticism. A
passage from early Theravada Buddhism represents classical mysticism:
“There is one truth without a second. People, being confused on this point,
claim there are many truths” (Sutta Nipata 884). Introvertive mystics
believe they are experiencing a transcendent reality directly. Thus, there is
less mystery than Kantians suppose, even if there is more to the
transcendent reality than human beings are capable of handling. But there
are no differentiated aspects of what is experienced in the “empty” depth-
mystical experience (as with the elephant), and thus having direct access to
a reality is a problem for any idea of pluralism. Equally important, mystics
also have different soteriological goals with different paths and values—i.e.,
different paths leading to different summits—not just different conceptions
of transcendent realities.21 It is hard to see theists as heading for the same
goal as Buddhists. Like the Buddha, some may not speculate on what
happens when the enlightened die, or all mystics may believe human
conceptions cannot truly reflect transcendent realities, but they nevertheless
all have particular ways of life that do not converge into one generic
“mystical way of life.” So too, classical mystics may be willing to accept
that their doctrines are only “partial truths” and not the complete truth, but
they typically are not willing to accept that doctrines that conflict with
theirs are equally true.
      Overall, no one has advanced a successful way to get around the fact
that the doctrines of the world religions conflict with each other in at least
some core claims.22 There may be one common depth-mystical experience,
and other experiences and aspects of mystical ways of life may fall into
some helpful abstract categories (“transcendent realities,” “soteriological
goals,” and so on), but there is no “concordant discord,” to cite the title of
one of R. C. Zaehner’s books.