His point is that whether there is A or not-A, there is no B. For example,
whether (A) there is self-existence or (not-A) not, (B) change is not
possible: if something is self-existent, it is permanent and so there can be
not change; if there is no self-existence, then nothing real exists, and so
there is nothing that could change. Either way, there is nothing “real” that
could change, and so there is no “real” change.
     Nagarjuna also employed the “four options” form noted above
concerning the Buddha’s teachings (MK 1.1, 12.1, 18.8, 22.11–12, 25.15–
18, 25.22–23, 27.13, 27.20). Here he denies x exists, x does not exist, x both
exists and does not exist, and x neither exists nor does not exist.
Philosophers have spilled a lot of ink applying symbolic logic to
Nagarjuna’s four denials to try to keep them from being paradoxical. Does
not the denial of the first option logically commit the holder to the second?
How can someone deny that something neither exists nor does not exist?
The denial of the fourth option makes Nagarjuna look as if he is denying
the basic law of noncontradiction. But the efforts to reconstruct the four
options through modern symbolic logic to save Nagarjuna make him too
sophisticated. (This is not to deny that symbolic logic can show that his
conclusions are logically valid [see Jones 1993a: 260–61 n. 6]. But showing
that is not the same as claiming that that is how Nagarjuna actually
reasoned.) More importantly, such arguments miss the point: Nagarjuna is
trying to state that we cannot think of anything in terms of self-existence.
He uses the form of the four options simply to try to cover all positive and
negative possibilities—i.e., he is saying there are no other possible options,
and so we cannot think of any phenomenon in terms of “self-existence” in
any way. He wants to cover all possibilities so that all claims involving self-
existence in different contexts are eliminated, and thus emptiness—i.e., the
absence of anything self-existent—is established by default as the only
logical alternative.
      And it can be shown easily and without resorting to technical rules that
the four options approach is not logically contradictory. Consider again the
fact mentioned in the last chapter that numbers do not have color. If
someone asks what color the number 4 is, we might say “It is not blue, not a
color other than blue, not both blue and another color, nor neither blue nor
another color.” All four denials are true and consistent since numbers do not
have color. The denial of any option does not logically commit someone to
any other position on the color of four. We might think that the last option
applies—“neither blue nor another color” (and thus is transparent)—but in
Nagarjuna’s framework, as long as we are thinking in terms of color we are
on the wrong track regarding the nature of numbers, i.e., as objects to which
color terms could apply. So too, with the four options regarding whether
something “exists”: to Nagarjuna, only something that is self-existent can
exist or not exist, but as long as we are thinking of phenomena in terms of
self-existence, we do not understand the true nature of reality but are
thinking along conventional lines and thus in terms that cannot apply. To
expand Bertrand Russell’s example of “The present King of France is bald”:
it is wrong to answer “yes” or “no” or that “he is both bald and not bald” or
that “he is neither bald nor not bald,” since he does not exist. To use the
Buddhist analogy, it is like asking what direction a flame goes when a fire
goes out—any answer shows that we are thinking along the wrong lines
(i.e., that the flame still exists). So too, for Nagarjuna, only an entity
existing by self-existence could be the subject of the four options, and the
denial of all four options is consistent if there are no self-existent realities.
      In sum, all Nagarjuna is saying is that the subject to each option does
not exist. In addition, he treats the fourth alternative as a type of thing—if
nirvana is neither an entity nor a nonentity, then it cannot be a “neither-an-
entity-or-a-nonentity” (MK 25.16). Such an entity is the kind of entity that
contrasts with the third option: if we can establish something that is “x-and-
not-x,” then we can establish what contrasts with it—something that is
“neither-x-nor-not-x” (e.g., MK 27.18, 27.28). Nagarjuna is arguing that the
denial of x depends on there being x in the first place, and so if we cannot
establish x as real (i.e., self-existent), we cannot establish its absence (i.e., a
not-x) or a conjunction of the two (x-and-“not-x”) or the conjunction of
their absences (neither-x-nor-“not-x”). The third option can be established
only if the first two options can be (MK 5.6, 12.9), and the fourth could be
established only if we could establish the third alternative (MK 25.15,
27.18, 27.28). Thus, since x is not real to begin with, none of the other
options are possible. In addition, Nagarjuna would also add that we must
reject the third option because x-and-not-x would be a composite of
opposites, but opposites cannot exist together in the same place (e.g., light
and dark [MK 25.14]). Thus, nothing more is needed to explain the four
options than Nagarjuna’s general method of interconnecting terms. Indeed,
by focusing instead on possible logical reconstructions of the four options,
philosophers are missing how the arguments actually proceed—in short,
they miss Nagarjuna’s actual reasoning entirely.
      A related point is that in MK 18.8 the four options are not denied.
Nagarjuna says: “Everything is real, and everything is unreal; everything is
both real and unreal; everything is neither real nor unreal.” The third option
appears to violate the law of the noncontradiction and the fourth the law of
the excluded middle. But (following the later Madhyamika Chandrakirti)
this can be made consistent by means of the Buddhist doctrine of two types
of truths, conventional and ultimate: “Every entity is real from the
conventional point of view [MK 7.24], and every entity is unreal from the
ultimate point of view [MK 15.4]; every entity is both conventionally real
and ultimately unreal; every entity is neither ultimately real nor
conventionally unreal.” Entities are not real from the point of view of their
true ontic status (i.e., they are not self-existent and thus not real), but the
configurations of the factors of the experienced world (dharmas) are in fact
part of the conventional world, and so Nagarjuna is not irrational in
affirming both claims. Conversely, for Nagarjuna the that-ness (tattva) of
the phenomenal realm is real from the ontologically correct point of view,
but it is not an entity and thus is nonexistent from a conventional point of
view. In the classic Indian example, a rope seen as a snake is indeed both
real (the rope) and totally unreal (the snake) at the same time. All this
removes any suggestion of paradox or irrationality.
      Thus, the apparent paradoxicality can be explained away. Certainly we
should not immediately jump to the conclusion that a thinker from another
culture and era is irrational simply from the form of his writings. Nor
should we ascribe to Nagarjuna the state of the art in philosophical logic
from our own culture and era. The question is not whether a given verse is
contradictory in form, but whether the thought behind his expressions has a
consistent content in terms of his beliefs. And if we can paraphrase
consistently what Nagarjuna writes, then his thought may in fact be rational.
If so, then the fact that the idea can also be stated illogically is irrelevant.28
For example, if I am standing in a doorway between two rooms with one
foot in each room, I can state this paradoxically: “I am in this room and not
in this room” or “I am in two rooms at once” (see Priest 2004: 28). But I
can also state the situation more completely without paradox: “I am
partially in one room and partially in another.” Genuine paradox occurs
only if I claim “I am entirely in two different rooms at the same time.” But
this statement is not only paradoxical but false and no one believes it. That
the situation can be stated incompletely and inaccurately as a paradox is
irrelevant—the true situation can be stated clearly and consistently. And the
same applies to the situation with Nagarjuna’s seemingly paradoxical
passages: we do not have to torture what he says to see that what he writes
is logical within his framework of beliefs.
      In sum, Nagarjuna’s arguments are rational and logical. And we can
understand his points without trying to make him into a twenty-first-century
Oxford logician. This is not to say that his arguments are convincing (see
Jones 2104b: 171–76), but only that they are not irrational: an argument
may be logically sound in the sense that a conclusion logically follows from
the premises without the premises being acceptable to us. So too, not all
mistakes in reasoning are logical fallacies. But there is no need to import
modern theories of alternative logics or to accept that some irresolvably
contradictory statements actually make intelligible claims to make
Nagarjuna’s works understandable. Nor was Nagarjuna “using reason to
destroy reason”—he was trying to show by rather rigorous conceptual
analysis and the use of rigorous logical reasoning that any metaphysical
system that affirms self-existing, permanent entities involves
inconsistencies with what we see actually happening in the world and thus
cannot be held. Indeed, logic and the avoidance of contradictions are
absolutely central to how his arguments proceed.
      Also note that he did this without appeal to mystical experiences: he
appealed to the conflict of his opponents’ alleged claims with ordinary
experience, but he never appealed to other types of experiences. However,
this does not mean that he was not a mystic: his arguments are addressed to
other Buddhist and Hindu theorists, but his works overall show that his aim
was to clear the mind of the unenlightened of the process of projecting
concepts onto phenomenal reality (prapancha) in order that they may
experience the real that-ness (tattva) of the phenomenal world as it truly is
(yathabhutam), thereby freeing the listeners from the suffering that ensues
when we try to force reality to conform to our preconceived ideas of
discrete “real” entities and from the desires driving rebirth.