Depth-Mystical Experiences
The inner focusing of attention can lead to the complete inward stillness of
the second type of introvertive experience: the depth-mystical experience.
There is a silence as the normal workings of the mind—including a sense of
self and self-will—are stilled. Phenomenologically the experience appears
free of all differentiated content. But looking back on the experience after it
is over, something is retained as having been present in the silent state. Is
that reality in fact free of all differentiated content? Even in the Abrahamic
traditions, there are mystics who affirm a “Godhead beyond God” free of all
features. To Eckhart, by means of the intellect (nous), one can break
through to the “ground” that is free of self-will, God’s will, all creatures and
“images,” and even God himself. If what was experienced were truly
ineffable, mystics could label it, but they could not know anything more
about it; thus, they could not in any way form any beliefs or values from the
experience about what was experienced. But mystics do claim something
with characteristics is experienced: pure consciousness or a transcendent
reality.
      Thus, in the depth-experience, the experiencer is free of all mental
differentiations and yet is still awake. This state of consciousness is a state
of lucid awareness supposedly having ontic significance. In the ordinary
“dualistic” state of mind, it is not uncommon to be so caught up in an
experience that we have no sense of self or time, and if we stop to reflect on
what is happening we drop out of the experience. This too applies to
introvertive mystical experiences: if you think “I am having a depth-
mystical experience,” you are not having one. Or as Eckhart said, “to be
conscious of knowing God is to know about God and the self,” not to be in
the actual experience of him. But when mystics look back on their depth-
mystical experiences, they have no memories of any differentiated content
—there is no sense of any object. It cannot even be called “self-awareness”
since the experiencer is not aware of a subject experiencing anything—
there seems to be no self, no subject or object, and no sense of ownership.
That is, there is no sense of personal possession of this awareness since it is
devoid of all personal psychological characteristics. Indeed, it does not
seem to be an individual’s consciousness at all but something transcending
all subjects. Since such a state of consciousness is transitory and not a
permanent condition of a person, it can be called an “experience,” or an
“event” if the term “experience” is taken to require a subject and an object.
      Because the depth-mystical experience is free of differentiated
features, the state of “pure consciousness” is sometimes characterized as a
state of unconsciousness—i.e., the meditator is in some sense awake but not
conscious (Pyysiäinen 2001). In one sense it may be so described: since one
is not aware of any content during the experience, in that sense it is not a
conscious event. But if after introvertive experiences mystics retain a sense
that the experiences involved a reality, how can the state be classified as
unconscious? And how could it seem to be so profound or indeed have any
emotional impact on the experiencer at all? Nevertheless, some scholars do
think that the experience is simply unconsciousness. Alan Wallace quotes a
Christian scholar who thinks that mystics undergo a “profound cataleptic
trance” manifested by some psychotics and long-term coma patients (2003:
7). But Wallace rightly asks, why would Buddhist contemplatives undergo
long years of training to achieve a state that could readily be achieved
through a swift blow to the head with a heavy blunt object? Something
more than true unconsciousness must be involved.
      At least bare consciousness is experienced in the depth-mystical
experience. And that may be all there is to such an experience: the
experience may be simply a state of pure consciousness (see Forman 2010).
Or after the experience it may seem to have been an experience of pure
beingness—existence as such with no distinctions and without any subject
of the event. That is, because depth-mystical experiences are free of
differentiable content (sensory input, mental images, and so on), depth-
mystics may consider beingness to be consciousness since consciousness is
what is directly experienced, and so everything is grounded in
consciousness or in fact is consciousness. Thus, the minimal ontic
characterization is that depth-mystics are aware of beingness in such
experiences as consciousness. But mystics may conclude that what was
experienced is ontologically more than simply their own consciousness:
when the mind is completely stilled, an awareness bursts forth of a reality
greater than consciousness or the being of the natural realm—an
unmediated implosion of a more fundamental reality, with an
accompanying sense of certitude and typically finality. Eckhart described it
as the “birth of the son of God” in the “ground of the soul” where no
images or powers (such as the will or the senses) have ever been (2009: 29–
30). The reality can be called “transcendent,” whether a god or a
nonpersonal reality, since, if the reality exists and is involved, it exists
outside the natural realm that is open to ordinary experience and scientific
scrutiny. Yet the transcendent reality is open to being directly experienced
by beings within the natural realm, and this is possible only if it is not only
transcendent but also immanent: a creator god sustaining this world, or a
transcendent ontic depth to the entire natural world or at least to the
experiencer (the true self once the false sense of a phenomenal ego has been
eliminated). But if the experience is indeed empty of differentiatable
content, theistic and nontheistic mystics have identical depth-mystical
experiences.
      Theists can interpret the depth-experience as an experience of the
sheer beingness of God without any of God’s personal properties. But it is
hard to argue that theists experience anything personal here since what is
experienced is devoid of all content—“cleansed and emptied” of all
“distinct ideas and images,” to quote John of the Cross. Theists do not
experience personal properties in the moments of the depth-mystical
experience (as they do in a theistic introvertive experience). Rather, after
the experience they transfer their previous beliefs to the sense of reality and
finality given in the experience. The beliefs of nontheistic mystics and of
theistic mystics such as Eckhart suggest that what is experienced is devoid
of any features that can be likened to anything in the natural world,
including personhood. According to Shankara’s Advaita Vedanta, we can
experience Brahman either through “name and form” as a theistic god
(saguna brahman) or as the opposite of all features (nirguna brahman), but
Brahman in itself is beyond all attempts at conception, including Advaita’s
standard characterizations of it as reality (sat), an inactive consciousness
(chitta), and bliss (ananda) (Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-bhashya 2.3.1;
Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.2.22). Traditions that give more specifics to the
transcendent reality do not necessarily do so in theistic terms. For example,
in Daoism, the Way (dao) is the constant but dynamic source of both being
and the order underlying change in the natural world, with the emphasis on
the ordering aspect. There is no suggestion of a theistic god; rather the Way
is a nonpersonal, law-governed guiding force—a self-giving source that
benefits all equally.
      It should also be noted that there is a transitional state from the depth-
mystical experience back to the baseline state of consciousness or a state of
mindfulness. During this transition, images, prior beliefs, and other dualistic
phenomena flood back into the mind. This state is not part of the depth-
mystical experience itself, but it may well be seen as part of the “total
package” between the departure from dualistic consciousness to the depth-
mystical state and the return to dualistic consciousness (see Sullivan 1995:
56–57). Thus, theists may mistake its content for what was experienced in
the prior depth-mystical experience, especially since the transition is a
subconscious process and does not seem to be coming from the experiencer
but rather seems like an infused reality. More content may come from this
state that theists see as theistic in nature.
      In sum, the depth-mystical state of consciousness is itself free of any
object of attention and hence is not intentional. It can be called a
“contentless awareness”—a light not illuminating any object. It is like a
beam of light that illuminates but cannot reflect back upon itself and so is
never an object within awareness. Normally, we see only the objects and
not the light, but in a depth-mystical experience the light is all there is.
(This does not change the experiencer’s ontic status since the light was
always there.) This “light” is the content of the depth-mystical experience,
even though mystics are not aware that this is the case until the experience
is over—there is no space in the experience itself to make labeling the
content or interpreting the nature of this content possible at that time.
      Thus, in the depth-experience the mind is not truly empty. It has a
positive content: a pure consciousness is now fully occupying it, even
though the experiencer is not aware of the new content while the experience
is occurring. The full ontic nature of that consciousness is a matter of
interpretation after the experience. But during the experience the mind is
empty of all the differentiated content that normally occupies it—any object
of awareness (sensory input, ideas, sense of self, memories, feelings, and so
on) or even an awareness of awareness itself. But as mentioned above, if the
mind were in fact truly empty, mystics would have nothing to remember
after the experience, and it would be hard to see how the event could be
seen as an “experience” or “awareness” or as being conscious at all. Nor
would there be any grounds to make (or deny) any knowledge- or value-
claims based on the experience. Nor could there be any emotional impact
on the experiencer. But mystics are not unconscious, and they do not suffer
from amnesia for the period they undergo a depth-mystical experience: a
sense of something real, and an accompanying sense of profundity is
retained after the experience.
     The depth-experience is open to four different ontic interpretations: