The Question of Mystical Union
One popular misconception is that all mystics treat their experiences as
uniting them with the power underlying the natural world. Advaita
Vedanta’s radical monism of consciousness (i.e., a nonduality of the
consciousness that constitutes the subject and the consciousness that
constitutes objective phenomena) is the classic instance of a metaphysical
system based on overcoming even the duality of subject and object—
indeed, in this interpretation, there is only one reality and thus no duality to
overcome, no dependence of one reality on another, and no emanation of
phenomena or “degrees” of reality. However, most mystical systems do not
involve an all-encompassing nonduality in which all of the apparent
diversity in the world is in the final analysis unreal. In particular, for
Samkhya there is no underlying creator or common ground to both matter
and consciousness; rather, there is an irreducible dualism of two
fundamental substances and a plurality of distinct selves. Nor, as is also
commonly believed, has any classical mystical tradition adopted a
pantheism equating the transcendent reality with the natural world (creator
with creation, Brahman with maya), thereby making the natural realm fully
real in the final analysis.28 Neoplatonism is often considered pantheistic,
but the material universe is an emanation of the One, not the One itself.
Pantheism is in fact a modern concept that was devised within a theistic
framework by John Toland in the eighteenth century to contrast that idea
with classical theism and does not reflect any classical mystical tradition. It
does not capture the idea of emanationism, Advaita’s nondualism, or the
role of the Buddha-nature in Mahayana Buddhism.
     Contrary to another popular idea, classical mystics do not speak in
terms of a union of two substances—a fusion of the experiencer and
another reality that had previously been two realities into one reality. On the
extrovertive level, the sense of barriers is broken down, and one perceives
“oneness”: one realizes that we always have had the same substance
(beingness) as everything else (and so are the same as them in that way) and
that we are joined to everything else in one interconnected whole. Thus, one
has always been united to everything in sharing one being. But we are not
united or identical with everything on the level of differentiated objects.
With the loss of the sense of self, the conceptual boundaries we habitually
impose on phenomena disappear, and thus we feel we are “merging” with
the rest of the cosmos or feel that our being is the same as the being of
everything else in nature. Robert Forman gives a personal instance of
“becoming” what he saw: while driving, he was the mile-marker he saw
(2010: 164–65). But he was still driving the car—he did not physically
become the mile-marker. There is the lost of a sense of a separate observer
witnessing a distinct object. There simply was no boundary between the
marker and himself—no “something other” set off over against him (ibid.:
165) as a distinct object. But when he drove beyond the sign, it did not
continue with him: it remained distinct—there was no new uniting with
another reality that had previously been distinct or any other ontic change.
We were already ontologically connected through being with everything
else, and with the extrovertive experience we are now realizing what has
always been the case. This state of consciousness is structured, and the felt
sense of unity does not replace ordinary knowledge of the world—e.g., one
can still tell how far away an object is (Forman 2014: 114).
      Thus, there may be a sense of union or a sense of individuality melting
away, but there is no ontic change in nature from what was already our true
situation all along—only the false conceptual boundaries that we ourselves
had created soften or disappear. Through experiencing the commonality of
being, one gains a knowledge by participation, but there still is no new ontic
union of substances. With the loss of a sense of ego, the experiencer may
feel for the first time the true connection we all always have had to the rest
of reality, but our true situation has not changed: experiencers do not attain
a new ontic state but merely realize what was actually always the case. A
fiction has simply disappeared from the mind. Our consciousness and focus
change: a Gestalt-like shift occurs to being aware of the beingness of things.
There may also be a change in the brain. For example, if the mind is a
“reducing value,” the brain’s wiring may be changed by mystical
experiences to allow in more consciousness. But otherwise we remain the
same: there is no mental “merging” of our mind with another. So too, the
spatially diverse phenomena of the sensory realm remain intact even if there
is now seen to be no hard and fast boundaries reflecting our cultural
concepts. There is no amalgamation of all phenomena being identical to
each other: there is nothing real on the level of phenomena to be identical
to, but only a common beingness that one already has—thus, things remain
distinct in their “unreal” thingness.
      So too for introvertive experiences. In no major mystical tradition do
two previously distinct substances or “natures” become united into one in a
mystical experience. There is a participatory knowledge of a transcendent
reality, but there is no ontic transformation or transubstantiation of an
“essence” converting the person into a transcendent reality. The standard
position in the Abrahamic mystical traditions is to maintain the idea of
creaturehood and insist that we creatures cannot be united to God—our
“nature” does not change into God’s. This dualism is necessary to enable
the theists’ emphasis on creatures loving God. One only becomes aware of
the divine being that has always been immanent in us. In medieval
Christianity, common images included two lovers, fire heating an iron rod,
and the air pervaded by the warmth of the sun. But there is no literal
“merging” or “absorption” of one reality into another resulting in only one
entity (Jantzen 1989). Nor is one transformed or converted into God like the
sacrament of bread is converted into the body of Christ (as Eckhart’s
condemners understood him to claim). Jan van Ruusbroec makes clear in
his later writings that there is a distinction of natures and that the union with
God is only in “one spirit and life with him” (1985: 240, 246). Few
Christian mystics used the term unio mystica before the modern era
(McGinn 2001: 132). It is only in the modern study of mysticism that unio
mystica attained a central place (McGinn 2006: 427). Christian mystics
struggled over what “becoming one with God” meant, but they usually
meant it in terms of a loving union of wills with God’s or even a fusion of
the mind with God’s (ibid.: 427–29), but this is an alignment of spirit, not
an ontic union of substances. To Eckhart, there is a loving union of two
spirits, one created and one uncreated (McGinn 2001: 46); oneness with
God is a matter of the likeness of his image in beings with a created nature
(Eckhart 2009: 319). To Bernard of Clairvaux, it is like a drop of water in
wine taking on the taste of wine, but he added that no doubt the substance
of the person remained distinct, if now in a new form—only the will is now
melted with God’s (McGinn 2006: 436; also see Eckhart 2009: 316). In
often erotic imagery based on the biblical Song of Songs, Christian mystics
speak of a mystical experience as a “kiss” and of a “marriage” of God or
Christ with the soul. For John of the Cross, the consummation of the
spiritual marriage is the union of two natures in one spirit and love (ibid.:
462). God’s will and the mystic’s will are now simply in “unison”—
becoming one in spirit (I Corinthians 6:17). This is how Christian mystics
understood the biblical passage from Paul: “It is no longer I who live, but
Christ who lives in me” (Galatians 2:20).
      In Judaism, any type of identity with God is considered impossible—
as in much Protestant Christianity, there is a unbridgeable gap between
creator and creation. In Islam, Sufis speak of “the annihilation of the self”
(fana) and the replacement of the self with the abiding presence (baqa) of
Allah as the multiplicity of the phenomenal world becomes visible again
after fana. But the self is not annihilated—only the sense of a self not
dependent on Allah is. Under one interpretation, Allah is the only reality
and thus is the true agent of all of “our” actions—i.e., not only is there only
one Allah, there is nothing else but Allah, and so we have no independent
reality. However, the more common interpretation among Sufis is that the
world is not an illusion and neither is each self; rather, both the world and
each self are mirrors reflecting Allah and thus are themselves separate and
real. The self is a created entity and thus distinct from Allah even if Allah is
“closer than the pulse in one’s own throat,” to quote Husayn al-Hallaj. The
orthodox Sufi goal is a loving communion of two realities—Allah and the
soul—not a return to “oneness of being,” as with Ibn Arabi. Indeed, for a
mystic to claim to be one with Allah or actually to be Allah is a heresy
punishable by death, as al-Hallaj found out the hard way for claiming “I am
the Real!” (al-Haqq).
      In Neoplatonism, the opposite of emanation—absorption—is a type of
union, but as adopted by the Western theistic traditions the reality of a
separate self remains the orthodox position for mystics.29 For Abrahamic
theists, our individual creaturehood always remains a distinct reality, even
though all beingness is supplied by God. Thus, for Meister Eckhart “God’s
is-ness [isticheit] is my is-ness,” the “ground of the soul” is the same as
God’s ground, “all creatures are one beingness” (contra Aquinas), and all
creatures are in themselves “pure nothing” since they get their being from
God. But he did not deny our creaturehood or a dualism of creator and
created (2009: 315, 319–20): we remain created and distinct entities since
the soul also has a created nature in addition to its uncreated nature (the
same being from the Godhead as God has)—the sense of self is simply
“idle” during a depth-mystical experience while God works in the inner,
silent, uncreated part of the soul. That is, the experiencer is not aware of his
or her self during a mystical experience, but nevertheless it is still there.
Things remain ontologically unchanged: the experiencer, by “forgetting” a
sense of “I” and all knowledge, now simply knows the transcendent reality
that has always been present in us. The correction of our knowledge and the
end of our “self-will” and all its accompanying emotions are the only
changes.
     The situation is the same for South and East Asian traditions. Evelyn
Underhill’s classic definition of mysticism as “the art of union with Reality”
(1961b: 23) does not apply even there. For Advaita, only Brahman is real,
and thus there is nothing else to unite with it. There is no “absorption” of an
independent self into “the Absolute.” Nor is the universe the pantheistic
body of Brahman. The Upanishads have an emanationist position, but
Advaita and Samkhya interpret the situation differently. The popular image
of a drop of water merging in the ocean does not fit the metaphysics of
these traditions. In fact, one image used by Shankara is the exact opposite:
just as the entire sun is reflected in full in each ripple on a pond (e.g.,
Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.2.11), so too all of reality (Brahman) is entirely
contained in each part of the world.30 There is still the reflected and what
does the reflecting, with the latter eventually disappearing when all sentient
beings become enlightened, thereby ending the unreal realm of rebirth.
Phenomenal objects also remain distinct in this metaphysics: one object is
not in another—the sun and the moon are not in us—but the same beingness
is in everything. So too, all reality present at any time is present in each
“eternal now” transcending the temporal continuum. Nor would Shankara
speak of “attaining union or identity” with Brahman: enlightenment is
merely coming to realize what one already is. Realizing that “you are that”
(Chandogya Upanishad 6.8.7) is realizing what has always been the case:
there is nothing for the self (atman) to unite with, nor can it be changed in
any way—all we need is a change in our knowledge and awareness. Under
Samkhya, each self is a distinct, silent witness that is to be isolated in the
state of kaivalya from matter and not united to anything. For Daoists, the
Way is already “in” us—we simply need to align ourselves with it. Nor is
the extrovertive mindfulness state in Buddhism taken to be a “union” of
anything with anything: there are no selves or “real” entities, and thus no
things to become united. Nirvana is not an entity in any sense, although
many Westerners treat it as an analog to God: it is the state of the person
(before and after death) in which the fires of hatred, greed, and delusion
have been exhausted—it is not a reality that could be “united” with.
     In sum, the way modern nonmystical writers have framed the situation
in terms of “mystical union” only introduces problems. There are less-
conceptual differentiations in the extrovertive mystical states and no
differentiations during the depth-mystical experience, and with the absence
of differentiations in the mind there is a sense of unity to our being: we
finally realize that all of reality shares one simple and partless beingness or
the same ontic source, or that our true transcendent self is isolated from the
rest of reality. With a mystical experience we are not “united to God” or
another transcendent reality in any ontic way that was not previously
always occurring. With enlightenment, only our sense of individual
existence and of self-will is abolished. That is, all that changes are our
knowledge, our will, and our unenlightened emotions—the experiencer
does not “obtain” or “become” anything ontologically new.