Mystical Metaphysics
A tradition’s worldview outlines the nature of reality in a way that makes
the other components of its religious way of life (the values, action-guides,
rituals, and goals) seem plausible and reasonable to the practitioner. No
religion has only one such worldview—different traditions have different
ideas on the metaphysical questions, and all worldviews evolve over time.
For example, Christianity has embraced Platonism, Aristotelianism, and
more modern metaphysics as its “official” metaphysical framework at
different times in its history; today it does not have only one metaphysical
frame. The metaphysical frame of reference presents a picture of reality
within which the religious way of life makes sense; one’s way of life
thereby seems grounded in reality. Thus, such metaphysics affect how one
lives. Indeed, William James went so far as to say, “The question is not
whether the theory of the cosmos affects matters, but whether, in the long
run, anything else does.” He added, “A man’s vision is the single great fact
about him.”
       All forms of classical introvertive mysticism conflict with naturalism,
i.e., the belief that only what in principle can be studied by science is real
(see Jones 2009: 191–202). Transcendent realities are by definition either
beyond the phenomenal realm or, if immanent to this realm, beyond
empirical checking or worldly characterization.1 Classical introvertive
mystics are transcendent realists. What is transcendent is not merely an
infinite amount of something natural or some part of the natural realm that
we cannot know, such as “dark energy,” but something of another type
altogether—something that in principle cannot be open to scientific study in
whole or in part. Nor is it in a space beyond our spatiotemporal realm that
encompasses it, although philosophers often treat it that way: it is
something to which any phenomenal categories such as “space” would not
apply. It is in an ontologically unique category. Naturalists deny any
transcendent realm or transcendent explanation of natural events.2 They
consider explanations in terms of natural entities and processes as the best
available explanation of all events, including mystical experiences, given all
our knowledge. Against the naturalists, all classical mystics insist that
introvertive mystical experiences involve direct access to a reality that is
beyond any scientific testing in at least some regards. However, beyond
rejecting naturalism, introvertive mysticisms disagree among themselves on
the three central topics of mystical metaphysics noted above.
      Mystics can also be philosophers or theologians—it is not an either/or
choice. Meister Eckhart is an example of a mystic who was a philosopher
(McGinn 2001: 21–22). But mystics are not typically speculative
metaphysicians constructing systems for the intellectual comprehension of
the universe—Plotinus’s elaborate Neoplatonism being the prime exception.
Rather, they typically are religious practitioners trying to live a life attuned
to reality. Transcendent realities are not presented as explanatory posits but
as realities that have been experienced. However, as discussed, mystics
themselves must go beyond the experiential evidence given in a mystical
experience to a fuller understanding of what is experienced. Thus, mystical
accounts of what introvertive mystics experience must be “speculative” in
one sense—i.e., the accounts must go beyond the experiential content—but
the speculation must be grounded in what is experienced. However, any
theoretical posits or unexperiencable noumena in mystical doctrines would
be the result of input from nonmystical sources, and mystics may dismiss
much of such input as worthless human rantings. Still, even mystical
doctrines are the result of the interaction of mystical experiences (if
constructivists are wrong) and nonmystical considerations within a religious
tradition, with ideas from multiple sources.3 Theologians and religious
theists in nontheistic traditions often have very unmystical concerns, but
they end up shaping the doctrines that mystics accept as the orthodox
standard for understanding their own experiences. In the extreme, the
unenlightened end up deciding the doctrines that mystics accept, although
mystics may adjust their understanding of those doctrines in light of their
mystical experiences.
      This leads to an interesting fact: most mystical knowledge-claims are
the same as some nonmystical religious and philosophical claims. Virtually
every claim that mystics have advanced has also been advanced in
nonmystical forms by nonmystics for philosophical reasons totally
unrelated to mystical experiences. Indeed, many mystical claims are, from a
metaphysical point of view, unexceptional.4 So too, mystics quote mystics
and nonmystics alike on philosophical and theological issues. In sum, there
is nothing particularly mystical about many “mystical” claims. Many claims
come from simply working out the logic of, for example, the idea of a
“wholly other” creator god who alone is ultimately real. Nor do we need to
hold any particular metaphysical belief to have mystical experiences. One’s
understanding of the experiences can be fitted into any metaphysical system
(including naturalism, as noted in the last chapter). The fact that some
claims about a creator or sustainer or an idealism are congenial to both
extrovertive and introvertive mystics does not transform them into
inherently “mystical” claims. But this makes it difficult sometimes to tell
whether a particular thinker actually had mystical experiences of the
oneness and power of a transcendent reality, or if he or she is only a
speculative thinker. It also leads to asking whether such early philosophical
figures as Pythagoras, Parmenides, and Plato were mystics.
      Consider a few examples. Parmenides argued “All is one” on logical
grounds. He also argued that all change is an illusion, despite appearances
to the contrary. John McTaggart and others have argued that time is unreal,
for philosophical reasons.5 Nonmystics have also argued that “All is
impermanent” ever since Heraclitus first noted that we cannot step in the
same river twice—part of what constitutes the river (and part of what
constitutes us) will have changed by the time we try stepping into it a
second time. Alfred North Whitehead’s “process philosophy” has been
likened to Buddhist metaphysics. Immanuel Kant maintained that we can be
certain that a transcendent reality-in-itself exists, but we cannot know
anything of its nature because of the antinomies that reason produces. So
too, the problem of how language operates if there are in fact no permanent
entities in the world to denote is now prominent in philosophy. And even
the via negativa has returned to contemporary theology without any
reference to mysticism.
      Even if mystical experiences lie at the historical root of our ancestors’
initial sense of a cosmic “wholeness” or “unity,” nevertheless that all things
share the same one beingness, or that the natural universe is a structured
organic whole free of ontologically distinct entities (especially no “self”), or
that the natural universe is constituted only of interconnected and
impermanent parts, are points that nonmystics can easily accept today.
Different nodes within the whole can be conceptually separated in order to
live in the world, but it is an “illusion” to think that they are ontologically
distinct and independent entities. Indeed, the impermanence and
interconnectedness of the external world is obvious to anyone on some
reflection. Even naturalists can readily agree that everything is
interconnected, impermanent, and dependent on other things, although they
see no point in emphasizing this since this general metaphysical observation
does not help scientists devise new theories. In fact, naturalists argue that
we, along with everything else in our solar system, are connected natural
products made only of the refuse of some earlier supernova and that all of
our universe in fact came from the same matter/energy of a Big Bang.6
      That this world is dependent on a transcendent reality is not a claim
unique to mysticism, nor do we need to be mystics to follow the analogy of
the dream and its dreamer to envision that there is a reality underlying this
world and giving it being. Talking about “beingness” is difficult since there
is nothing real to contrast with it.7 But Milton Munitz can say things about
“being-in-itself” that sound very mystical, even though his ideas are based
on analytical philosophy alone (1965, 1986, 1990; also see Jones 2009: 24–
27)—indeed, he borrowed his preferred term (“Boundless Existence”) from
Alfred Lord Tennyson’s description of his extrovertive mystical experience.
      So too, we need no mystical experience to realize that there is no
permanent substratum to a “person”—the mind and body are constantly
changing, giving rise to the perennial issue in philosophy of personal
identity over time. To Albert Einstein, the sense that we are each a distinct,
self-contained entity is an “optical illusion of consciousness.” Many
philosophers since David Hume have rejected the idea of a unified center to
consciousness—the sense of a “self” separate from the rest of the world is
merely a point of reference concocted by the brain to help us deal with the
world and does not correspond to anything real. Many psychologists and
neuroscientists claim today that there is no “self” in our mental makeup—
i.e., no one unified center of awareness, and no one locus in the brain to our
sense of “self.” Rather, there may be multiple “selves”—i.e., each conscious
type of mental functioning can produce a self-awareness of that activity, but
there is no one command center overseeing all such acts of self-awareness.
       Extrovertive or introvertive mystical experiences are not needed to
devise these philosophical points, nor will having such experiences help us
to understand the philosophical arguments for them. Thus, there is no need
to credit mysticism as their source. Mindfulness highlights impermanence
and interconnectedness, and all mystical experiences highlight beingness,
but experiences of beingness are not necessary to validate the naturalists’
points. Nor will adopting any of these ideas by itself aid in inducing any
mystical experience—we can remain as unmystical as before. The
philosopher Derek Parfit finds the neuroscientific denial of any “self”
within our mental makeup quite liberating without any resulting hint of
mysticism.
       But it is important to remember that mystics may well understand
these claims differently, since they see the concepts in terms of experienced
realities and not explanatory posits. Introvertive mystics experience the
oneness of being and may say “All is one,” but they do not mean that “All
things have the same substance” if what is meant is that “substance” is a
type of objective thing, although that may be how the unenlightened
understand the claim. Mystics do not see transcendent realities as objects
distinct from them. The difference with extrovertive mystical states of
consciousness is that the beingness of things is brought into awareness, and
then the impermanent and interconnected beingness of all of the everyday
realm of becoming is seen more clearly and becomes prominent. In short,
mystics realize something experientially and make it part of the framework
of their lives; they do not merely see some logical points about everyday
phenomena that nonmystics also may acknowledge as true. Thus, their
understanding may be significantly different even when using the same
language that nonmystics use to depict what is real. Conversely, the
unenlightened, who look at mystical doctrines through the lens of various
philosophical “isms”—idealism, monism, and so on—may well be
distorting the mystical ideas by thinking in terms of distinct entities, selves,
and other nonmystical philosophical ideas. (The issue of the limit of the
unenlightened’s understanding of mystical claims will be discussed in the
next chapter.) This at least raises the issue of whether mystical claims are
substantively different from nonmystical ones, even if the same words are
used by mystics and nonmystics.