Explaining Away Mystical Experiences
The naturalists’ view can be foreseen in the words of Voltaire: religious
experiences are “supernatural visions permitted to him or her who is gifted
by God with the special grace of possessing a cracked brain, a hysterical
temperament, a disordered digestion, or, most of all, the art of lying with
effrontery.” Or as Bertrand Russell put the point more exactly: “From a
scientific point of view, we can make no distinction between the man who
eats little and sees heaven and the man who drinks a lot and sees snakes.
Each is in an abnormal physical condition, and therefore has abnormal
perceptions” (1997: 188). Naturalists argue that scientists can duplicate
every experiential feature of the various types of mystical experiences
through normal, well-understood neurological mechanisms and can also
explain the strong emotional effects these experiences have on the
participants. Naturalists then conclude that any mystical experience is
nothing but natural phenomena: the only realities involved in the
experiences are the experiencer and elements of the natural world. This
means that, even if a transcendent reality does happen to exist, an
introvertive mystical experience is still not an experience of anything but
natural phenomena. Mystical experiences are not only internal events but
“merely subjective” in a negative epistemic sense that no reality but the
brain is involved. Thus, the alleged cognitive content of these experiences
—i.e., any beliefs based on them regarding the existence and nature of
transcendent realities—is radically discredited.
      Besides the “damaged brain” explanation, one popular way to explain
the phenomenology of the depth-mystical experiences is as an illusion
resulting from a feedback effect: our brain has evolved to produce an
intentional consciousness to deal with problems of survival; thus, when the
mind is “on” but has no content with which to work, it malfunctions badly,
producing the illusory sense of mystical oneness, timelessness, and so on.16
Thus, even if no mental disorder is involved, the depth-mystical experience
is at most simply the brain spinning its wheels when it has no mental
content to work with. Another explanation is based on empirical research:
during mystical experiences, the area of the brain connected to our sense of
a distinction between oneself and the rest of the world (the junction of the
temporal and parietal lobes) receives less input and thus is less active; this
also affects our temporal and spatial orientation. At the same time, the area
of the brain connected to tagging events as significant (the limbic system in
the temporal lobes) is more active. Thus, it is only natural that there is no
sense of a boundary between the self and the world and also a sense that the
experience is of great importance. The sense of ineffability results simply
from the temporary dominance of the brain’s nonlinguistic right hemisphere
(in right-handed males) over the left when the two hemispheres are not
operating properly in tandem: the right hemisphere is still cognitive and
processing information, but it cannot put that information into words. Thus,
at best, what is experienced is our own consciousness. But consciousness is
only the product of the brain, and hence a mystical experience is not an
experience of a transcendent reality. The “pure consciousness” event is not
even an insight into the nature of consciousness, since the brain is
malfunctioning during this experience. The experience may well have a
powerful positive or negative impact on experiencers, even transforming
their personalities, but this is no reason to believe that a transcendent reality
rather than purely natural ones is involved. Mystical selflessness could end
a sense of self-centeredness and self-importance and thus lead to a sense of
a selfless connection to the rest of the universe, but there is no need to
invoke any transcendent reality to explain this. Mundane brain activity
explains it all.
      Other natural explanations are also popular.17 For example, certain
meditative techniques may consistently produce the experience of an
intense internal light, but naturalists argue that the experience is simply a
self-induced physiological change that experiencers misinterpret as
involving a transcendent reality. So too, the effects of meditative techniques
on the body do not depend on the beliefs of the meditator—the repeated
recitation of any phrase can produce the same effect regardless of the
content (Jesus prayer, Hindu mantra, Sufi prayer, or gibberish), and so the
content can be ignored. Any sense of presence is simply anthropomorphized
into a separate divine figure. Or if some “God gene” is found for having
religious experiences of self-transcendence, then naturalists conclude that it
has evolved in us only to enhance the genetic advantage of its practitioners.
Thus, mystical experiences can even be seen as a positive force in our lives
but treated as totally natural phenomena—ultimately, their only purpose, as
with all sociocultural phenomena, is what they do for our survival. The
mental processes of mystical experience are predispositions programmed
into the neural apparatus of our brain by thousands of generations of genetic
evolution. No transcendent realities are in any way involved, only nature
working itself out. Thus, mysticism as a product of an encounter with
transcendent realities is explained away, even though it may well be
valuable as a sociocultural phenomenon for its effect on the genetic level.
      One way or another, naturalists explain away all mystical
phenomenology, and thus mystical experiences present no reason to accept
any transcendent reality or a consciousness apart from the physical base that
produces it. Nor is there any reason here to deny the existence of time or of
a real and distinct self: the experiencer is simply unaware of them during
the experience. Mystical experiences may reveal an innate human mental
capacity and may be the same across cultures and eras, but this is only
because our brains are basically all the same, at least with regard to these
experiences. And the fact that these experiences are open to such diverse
doctrinal interpretations by mystics themselves in different traditions from
around the world only shows that no alleged transcendent reality is involved
that could shape the content of the experiences or constrain beliefs—
mystics simply are unaware that they are making up the cognitive claims
out of a mixture of cultural beliefs and unusual but purely natural brain
events. That is, not only will the biological bases permitting mystical
experiences to occur be identified, thereby explaining how introvertive
mystical experiences can occur in the human body, but the experiences
themselves will be explained away. Any supernatural explanations are
rendered groundless, and thus any claim to mystical knowledge should be
rejected.
      The scientific explanation of seeing a tree does not undercut the
possible validity of the experience as evidence that the tree exists, but
naturalists distinguish this from natural explanations of mystical
experiences.18 In the case of sense-experience, there is no alternative
explanation to a sense-object existing externally to our mind as part of the
causal chain leading to the perception (short of endorsing idealism or
solipsism), while in the case of mystical experiences a successful natural
explanation provides an alternative to a transcendent realism, and a
transcendent reality would thus not be necessary for these experiences to
occur. Being able to produce mystical experiences from purely natural
events also makes the occurrence of such experiences more predictable,
further solidifying the claim that the experiences are nothing but natural
events. The naturalists’ position also avoids one difficult problem: how
could “subjective” meditation or mystical experience cause changes in the
“objective” physical brain? Drugs and electrical stimulation are physical,
and thus these are in the same ontic category as the brain. Naturalists in fact
argue that a transcendent reality is not a possible cause at all: the
experiences’ complete explanation in terms of a set of necessary and
sufficient natural causes means that there is no place for a transcendent
cause to act, and so it renders any causal role for a transcendent reality
impossible even if a transcendent reality exists.
      Different types of mystical experiences may require different
explanations (i.e., different sets of biological or sociocultural mechanisms),
but to naturalists only natural phenomena will be involved, and the job of
scientists is to identify the set of natural processes at work in each type of
experience. If successful, scientists will be able to duplicate the
phenomenology of experiences of God without God or another transcendent
reality. And if the experiences can be completely explained in terms of
natural causes and conditions, then there are no experiential grounds to
believe that mystics have experiences of any transcendent realities. In sum,
if scientists can replicate something by natural means that is presented as
being caused by God, why would we think that mystical experiences have a
divine origin? Rather, such experiences would be only a purely natural
event.
      In sum, naturalists, as their name indicates, deny that a transcendent
reality is among the causal roots of any introvertive mystical experience.
But naturalists need not doubt the sincerity of the experiencers or deny that
people in fact have such purported experiences—they must simply argue
that experiencers are honestly mistaken about the real causes. Just as seeing
a rope as a snake is a genuine experience and can produce a real emotional
kick that in turn produces real physiological effects even though there is no
snake, so too mystics have genuine experiences even though only natural
phenomena are involved. The mistake that advocates of a transcendent
realism make, however, can be explained, and thereby the alleged insight
can be explained away: the only realities involved in these experiences are
the experiencer and elements of the natural world.
      So too, naturalists may even consider meditation to be valuable, but
only for its purported psychological or physiological benefits, not for
alleged insights. In fact, it is possible to give a positive naturalist
interpretation of both extrovertive and the depth-mystical experience—i.e.,
accepting that such experiences give an insight either into the nature of our
mind (perhaps revealing our purely natural consciousness free of all
intentional content) or into the beingness of the natural world. That is,
under this interpretation, mystical experiences cannot be explained away
any more than any other cognitive experience. In fact, much of mysticism
can be reconciled with naturalism and even with a reductive materialism.
(See Angel 2002; also see Wildman 2011 for a “religious naturalist” reading
of mystical claims that makes them into only symbolic statements about the
world.) Leonard Angel argues that the phenomenology of “universal self
consciousness mysticism” (i.e., the depth-mystical experiences) can be
explained even assuming that the only causal factors involved are physical
(2004: 20–26). Angel argues that strong evidence supports the principle of
the physical completeness for all human psychological functioning. (But
whether this principle is based only on experiences such as sense-
perception where possible nonnatural causes are not an issue is still a
question.) However, while this approach treats a mystical experience as a
positive occurrence rather than a brain malfunction and can also preserve
much of mystical ways of life, it still rejects the transcendent elements of
classical mystical metaphysics, thereby negating introvertive mystics’
cognitive claims.
      Thus, naturalists are not forced into affirming either that mystical
experiences are cognitive or that they must be the product of a mental
disorder. There is a third option: mystical experiences are unusual but
perfectly ordinary products of the brain that mystics typically misinterpret.
Thus, naturalists think they can account for mystical experiences within
their psychology better than do those who see a cognitive value in such
experiences. For naturalists, other experiences and nonexperiential factors
prevail over mystical ones on the cognitive issue. Thus, even if naturalists
themselves had mystical experiences, they would understandably dismiss
them as mere hallucinations, no matter how vivid, powerful, or “real” the
experiences felt afterward. Or the experience may cause them to rethink
their position but not change their minds, as A. J. Ayer’s near-death
experience toward the end of his life did not cause him to change his belief
in the lack of a life after death (or his hope that there is none), but it did
weaken his “inflexible attitude” toward that belief a little (1990). His
experience contained two beings and a bright but painful red light that he
took at the time as governing the universe (with space seeming to be
disjointed and the laws of nature to be not functioning properly), but his
later assessment was that this was all epiphenomena of a dying brain. The
psychologist Susan Blackmore had an extrovertive mystical experience and
practices mindfulness meditation, but after studying the issues she also
concluded that they have no ontic value or lasting therapeutic effects (see
Hogan 2003: 106–18).
      Thus, in constructing their metaphysics naturalists are weighing all
experiences, including mystical ones—they simply reach a different
conclusion about which experiences are cognitive than do advocates of a
transcendent realism. Reaching different conclusions than mystics do does
not make them any more dogmatic than those mystics who dismiss
everyday perceptions as not reflecting reality in the most fundamental
sense: everyone—including mystics themselves—must weigh all types of
experiences in constructing any metaphysics.