The Mirror Theory of Language
Thus, a problem with language is present for both extrovertive and
introvertive mystics. To extrovertive mystics, the conceptualizations
crystalized in language come to stand between us and what is real, and so
the conceptualizing mind must be stilled to see phenomenal reality as it
truly is: there are no real (i.e., independently existing) entities to be
referents of words. But language fixes our attention on the thingness of
things and not on their beingness. Naming freezes the flow of reality; it
marks off a referent from what it is not and thus separates the continuity of
reality into a series of disconnected objects—it gives things a standing
distinct from their surroundings. That is, naming cuts the flux of reality up
into distinct units when in fact reality is continuous. Terms are reified and
reality is reduced to a collection of discrete objects. Language, in short,
generates a false world of multiple changeless and independent “real”
entities and even makes beingness into a thing among things. To mystics,
the conceptual creations embodied in language that we invent and impose
on reality are “illusory” and blind us to what is actually real. All this makes
language the enemy of extrovertive mystical experiences: it fixes our mind
on unreal “things” when what is needed is to see that reality is not so
constructed. Conversely, experiencing the flow of an impermanent and
connected reality makes the discreteness of any linguistic denotation seem
hard to reconcile with reality as it truly is. How could we describe the
dynamic and continuous reality that we are part of in terms that are
necessarily static and distinct?
      With introvertive mystical experiences, the complete ontic otherness of
transcendent realities becomes the center of the problem. Hans-Georg
Gadamer says that “we can express everything in words,” but mystics
question this with regard to transcendent realities. They would insist that to
give expression to what is experienced in introvertive mystical experiences
changes its ontic nature: it seems to make it of the same nature as
phenomenal objects. Thus, transcendent realities are “beyond the domain of
language” in a way that phenomenal objects, from quarks to galaxies, are
not. To mystics, language creates something false out of what is
experienced. Whatever mystics say renders a reality that is not a
phenomenal thing into a phenomenal thing for the unenlightened, and hence
every assertion must be denied. Mystics want to speak, since something real
and profound is allegedly experienced, but how can they do that without
making that reality into something like a phenomenal object? How can we
express oneness in a dualistic language? How can an Advaita sentence have
the word “Brahman” as its object when Brahman is the eternal subject? God
is not “invisible,” “unlimited,” or “infinite” because these terms apply to
possible phenomenal realities and make God seem like merely an unusual
phenomenal object. Indeed, if “existence” applies to things in the
phenomenal world, how can we even say something transcendent “exists”?
How do we say it is real and not “nonexistent” without admitting some
terms that apply in the phenomenal world also apply to what is
transcendent? If a transcendent reality’s mode of existence is wholly
different, how does even the worldly term “is” apply? That is, how can even
formal concepts (e.g., “it exists”) rather than substantive ones about its
nature apply? Conversely, how could even “nonexistent” or “is not” apply,
since these terms depend on terms for phenomenal objects? Thus, is not
even the via negativa ruled out? Or how can names or pronouns apply?
Whenever we talk about something real, we talk about an it, which is ipso
facto wrong since this makes “it” into an object. Any pronoun—male,
female, or neuter—makes transcendent realities into objects. Doesn’t
referring to the Way make it an object? So too, if a transcendent reality is
utterly unique, then terms applicable to anything else cannot apply. Does
this not mean that all substantive characterizations, no matter how abstract
(“beingness,” “immutable,” “real”) are necessarily wrong since all our
terms are derived for things within the natural realm? The problem of the
ontic otherness of transcendent realities is supplemented by the problem of
the necessity of another mode of consciousness to experience it. Whenever
we say anything about what is allegedly experienced, we are in the wrong
state of consciousness to know that what is said is true. Any attempt to
“grasp” or “conceive” a transcendent reality makes it into something it is
not, and hence is a losing battle.
      However, both the extrovertive and introvertive problems can be
resolved if we consider an error in our common understanding of how
language works. The problem is not that language necessarily differentiates
items, but the implicit assumption that grammatical status dictates the ontic
status of the referents. That is, we go from the fact that denoting terms are
distinct to believing a world of Humean “loose and separate” entities, each
real and independent. Of particular importance, because we have such terms
as “I,” “me,” and “mine,” we tend to believe in a distinct entity that
corresponds to them—otherwise, why would there be such terms? In
Sanskrit, the word for noumenal self—atman—started as simply a reflexive
pronoun. Bertrand Russell believed that the whole idea of substantive
entities arose in that manner: “ ‘Substance’ … is a metaphysical mistake,
due to the transference to the world-structure of the structure of sentences
composed of a subject and a predicate” (1945: 202). Indeed, even saying
“Nothing exists”—rather than saying “There is nothing real”—seems to
make nothing into a something (and philosophers are indeed puzzled by
that). It would be absurd to maintain that words about water must be wet or
that the word “big” cannot refer to bigness because it is small, but believing
that static concepts cannot in principle apply to dynamic reality or that
applying a name or attribute to a transcendent reality “imposes” an ontic
“limitation” upon the referent or fundamentally changes its nature is only a
short step away.
      Under this view, for knowledge-claims to be accurate or useful, there
must be a correspondence between reality and words or statements in the
sense of mirroring. This leads to a correspondence theory of truth: true
statements mirror the differentiated facts in reality. According to Arthur
Danto, every metaphysical system he knew presupposes that the deep
structure of language and the world share the same form (1973). Certainly
Ludwig Wittgenstein’s Tractatus Logico-philosophicus with its “picture
theory” of language is a classic case: there is a shared logical form between
the linguistic structure of statements and the structure of reality on the level
of facts, and this structuring itself cannot be expressed. Language is a
picture of the logical structure of reality; each element of a statement
corresponds to an element of our world (Prop. 2.15), but this structure
cannot be pictured because it is not itself an item in the world.6 The mirror
theory is apparently implicit in early Indian philosophy concerning
language for the phenomenal world (see Bronkhorst 2011). The Indian
grammarians Jaimimi and Bhartrihari basically used the mirror theory to
defend the Vedic worldview. The mirror theory is also behind the claim that
in Buddhism final truths cannot be stated but are beyond words, and also
behind Dignaga’s claim that words do not refer to anything in the world.7
The opposite of a metaphysics of “atomic facts” can also lead to a type of
mirror theory—i.e., going from the fact that language is an interconnected
fabric of terms operating in relation to each other to the conclusion that
what is designated must also be interconnected. So too, in China the early
Daoist Zhuangzi saw the nonfixity of nature reflected in the changing
meaning of words (Zhuangzi 2).
      To the Buddhist Nagarjuna, people who accept the notion of self-
existent entities believe that language reflects the nature of things: if we
have a word for something, then it is an independent, self-existent part of
the world (Vigrahavyavartani 9). On the other hand, in his metaphysics the
interrelation of concepts shows that no entity (bhava) or factor of the
experienced world (dharma) is real because they lack anything that would
give them self-existence (svabhava) (Mula-madhyamaka-karikas 1.10,
13.3, 24.18–19). That is, we project conceptualizations (kalpanas) unto
reality and then discriminate out fictitious “real” entities and become
attached to them. Only by undermining all mental props can we be freed
from the suffering we cause ourselves by taking this fabricated world to be
real. But reality as it truly is (tattva) is free of all conceptual projection
(prapancha), and nirvana is simply the cessation of such projection (ibid.:
18.9, 25.24). In short, nirvana is the cessation of seeing the world as
constructed of multiple independent entities based only on our
conceptualizations (see Jones 2014b: 136–44, 151–57, 162–63).
      For the enlightened, the result is a form of linguistic antirealism. No
“thing” is designated by language. The problem is that there are no self-
contained, “real” things for terms to denote—there is thus no match of
categories and reality. In short, language cannot map what is actually real. It
cannot “capture” the flux of reality, and we distort reality if we start
thinking in terms of distinct permanent “entities.” Nevertheless, language is
not meaningless or useless. It still works as a tool for directing our attention
and for navigating through the impermanent configurations within the
phenomenal world. The Zen analogy of language as merely “a finger
pointing at the reflection of the moon in a pool of water” accepts that there
is in fact a moon and that we can direct attention to it by pointing. The
lesson is simply not to get attached to the pointing finger, let alone mistake
it for the moon, but to follow the direction indicated. Some terms work
better than others because of what actually exists in the world. Saying that
words are mere “names” or “designations,” as Buddhists do, does not
change the fact that something real in the world can be “designated.” The
word “moon” works in the analogy only because there is in reality a moon
(albeit not an independently existing or permanent entity) being reflected in
the pool that we can refer to. But mystics remind us that we should not get
caught up in the words and thoughts—they are no substitute for what is
real.
      The same problem occurs for introvertive mystics. To speak of a
“mystical union” surely would lead the unenlightened to think of God as a
distinct object and a mystical experience as a fusion of two entities. So too
with the language of “touching” or “grasping” God. To Shankara, Brahman
is the sole reality, and thus terms from the phenomenal realm cannot apply
for many reasons: the real is simple and has no attributes to describe; the
real is unique and so terms capable of describing anything else could not
apply; and no phenomenal (“illusory”) attributes could apply to the real.
The problem with transcendent realities is not merely the reification of
abstractions into concrete entities—another byproduct of the mirror theory
—but the transformation of their ontic status. Mystics speak of transcendent
realities as more than subjective, and we normally think there is only one
alternative: externally existing real objects. The idea of any referent is that
there is an object in the world: if God is not a thing, then he is a no-thing—
i.e., nothing—and so does not exist. Transcendent realities are ontologically
incommensurable with any results of dualistic awareness, and any words
may be taken as indicating such realities’ ontic status—i.e., the realities are
automatically reduced to differentiated objects among other phenomenal
objects. Thus, for Laozi the Way is nameless (wuming) and cannot be
named (Daodejing 1, 32, 37). The Way that can be told is not the eternal
Way; the name that can be named is not the eternal name (ibid.: 1). That is,
what can be spoken of, even when discussing the Way, is different in nature
from the Way. The Way is formless and beyond the senses and
comprehension and thus cannot be named (ibid.: 14). Names only come into
play with the opposition of objects (ibid.: 32), i.e., when we are aware of
opposites such as “beauty” and “ugliness” or “good” and “bad” (ibid.: 2).
But the Way is an “uncarved block” that is prior to all opposites and thus
free of all names (ibid.: 2, 43).