“Properly Basic Beliefs”
This conclusion follows only if all mystics are in the same boat
epistemically. They do appear so: they have the same or relevantly similar
experiences, and all traditions have been tested by criticism and responses
over time. Thus, all mystics appear to be epistemic peers. But the Christian
philosopher Alvin Plantinga disagrees. He offers a different way to claim
that theistic beliefs are rational even while denying that one needs to
present any evidence or argument for those beliefs (2000). In a type of
foundationalism, he takes an idea from John Calvin (also see Otto 1958:
143–54) and holds that core Christian beliefs are not supported by other
beliefs, but they are not groundless: they are supported by a
nonpropositional experience—a “sense of the divine (sensus divinitatis).”
Core Christian beliefs are fallible but supported by this sense. They are
“basic” because they are not derived from other beliefs but are the basis for
inferring other beliefs and for a theist’s reasoning. Thus, commitment to
core theistic beliefs is the epistemic bedrock for a theist’s structure of
knowledge. In addition, the core beliefs are “properly basic” because God
gave human beings a mental faculty similar to sense-perception that
disposes us to accept belief in God and enables us to form properly basic
beliefs about God’s presence and nature when the mental faculty is
operating normally. Theists thus are epistemically entitled to begin with a
belief in God without any supporting arguments or evidence to determine
the rationality of other beliefs. This sense is not a mystical experience; it
includes seeing the majesty of nature or the intricacy of a flower as the
creations of God. It provides a natural knowledge of God and provides
grounds for the belief, but it is not evidence for the truth of one’s specific
religious beliefs, just as seeing a sense-object justifies believing that that
object exists. Thus, core theistic beliefs cannot be criticized for not being
grounded in evidence. Rather, belief in God supports other beliefs and its
truth is guaranteed by the sensus divinitatis. Under a reliabilist theory of
knowledge, this sense warrants belief because it is designed for the purpose
of producing true beliefs and it functions properly in certain circumstances.
As long as this alleged sense has not been discredited, Plantinga claims that
it is just as rational for Christians to hold their belief in God without further
argument as it is rational for them to hold their basic perceptual beliefs—
when their cognitive faculties are operating normally, theists can trust their
beliefs in both circumstances equally. Thus, at present it is rational for
Christians to hold their beliefs since they are supported by a mental faculty
that has not been shown to be unreliable, and it is irrational for atheists to
reject these beliefs since their sense of the divine is malfunctioning due to
sin or some other defect, just as our sense-perception and memory may
malfunction due to our fallibility and self-deception. Thus, atheism is not
properly basic. So too for nontheisms. Atheists, nontheists, and those who
have lost their faith are in this way comparable to blind people with respect
to sense-perception. If Plantinga is correct, Christian mystics, or at least
theistic mystics, are in a superior epistemic position to nontheistic mystics.
Thus, nontheistic mystics are not epistemic peers of theistic ones.
      However, it is hard to see bedrock Christian beliefs as not in need of
any support by evidence or arguments from other beliefs when so many
other people do not see them as true. The same holds for a more general
belief in theism. It is questionable that one can be deemed rational when
one can only assert “God has created us all in such a way that my beliefs
are better than yours, and so I don’t have to give any reasons for that!” Such
beliefs do not seem “basic” but in need of support by reasons at least
recognizable to critics. Simply to assert a “divine sense” that requires no
argument seems dogmatic, especially when the examples that Plantinga
gives of its effect may be explainable in natural terms. So too, the alleged
“sense of God” does not seem analogous to sense-perception: even most
theists would admit that we can disagree about the existence of God in a
way that we cannot dispute the general reliability of sense-perceptions. In
particular, all religious claims for transcendent realities are open to
competing natural explanations while the explanation of sense-experiences
has no nonnatural competitor. Nor does his posited sense explain why there
are nontheists—why should a major segment of humanity be “blind”? In his
characterization, the religious sense is not merely a sense of a transcendent
reality, but a sense of the more specific theistic conception of a god. Why
do, for example, people raised as Advaitins and Buddhists respond
differently in circumstances where theists respond with theistic beliefs? So
too, a sense of dread or fear in numinous experiences may come from the
unconscious mind alone or from being brought up with a certain version of
a transcendent reality and is not per se evidence of the presence of a god.
How do we know that the intuition of a designer and creator is a divinely
implanted sense rather than merely an anthropomorphic projection of a
sense of agency and purpose in the natural realm that has evolved in us
naturally for purposes of survival? By introducing a “sense of the divine,”
Plantinga seems to be trying to make what is no more than one
metaphysical belief that needs support into something like an experience to
shield it from criticism.
      The diversity of religious traditions also presents a major hurdle.
Plantinga concedes that awareness of this diversity does decrease the
strength with which the warrant of theistic belief is held, although he denies
that it defeats it (2000: 457). To nontheists, their beliefs seem as “basic” to
them in the sense he intends as theistic ones seems to theists. In addition,
the alleged sensus divinitatis leads to conflicting beliefs even among theists
of different religions and different subtraditions within those religions.
Moreover, according to Plantinga only Christians are properly inspired by
the inner witness of the Holy Spirit and saved. But obviously members of
the other traditions can assert something similar for themselves, and here
Plantinga must offer an argument, not a bald assertion of faith. As things
stand, we have nothing to suggest that the cognitive faculties of nontheists
are malfunctioning, damaged, or defective except Plantinga’s fiat. In fact,
he even concedes that his approach only works for those who find that the
belief that God exists is within their own set of basic beliefs. He admits that
people in other faiths will have quite different beliefs that they consider
“properly basic.” But this makes it impossible to offer an argument for the
superiority of theism or any religious tradition—there is instead a pluralism
of competing sets of properly basic beliefs, each immune from outside
judgment. This only hurts the rationality of his position. In addition, having
to rely on the testimony of others for experiences that one has not had
would lessen the degree of rationality in accepting mystics’ claims, as noted
in the last section. And it is hard to see reliance on someone else’s
experiences as constituting a “basic” belief, since such reliance would
require defending.
      Nor does Plantinga’s theory seem to account adequately for the
presence of the nonreligious who simply are not interested in religious
matters. Many people looking at the majesty of the night sky may well
think that there must be a designer/creator behind all this to whom we owe
gratitude and obedience, but there are still many others who are awed by the
grandeur of the universe and do not think of anything transcending it; and
there are many who are impressed by science who agree with Steven
Weinberg when he famously said “[t]he more the universe seems
comprehensible, the more it also seems pointless.” Claiming, as Plantinga
does, that a God-given “sense of the divine” is malfunctioning in these
nontheistic reactions due to sinfulness or spiritual immaturity is simply
question-begging and demands further argument. The theistic reaction looks
more like an inference than the operation of a special God-implanted mental
faculty. And invoking the Calvinist position that God has not chosen those
who do not react theistically is only an ad hoc excuse. Such a position may
follow from his own beliefs, but to others it seems to be arbitrarily
privileging the tradition he just happened to have been raised in.32
Buddhists and Advaitins may respond that it is belief in a personal god that
in fact is the result of a malfunctioning mystical cognitive faculty: the
proper sense of the transcendent is contaminated by theists’ primitive
response of seeing personal agents behind everything in nature. There is no
neutral way to decide the question, but only a battle of competing beliefs,
each of which requires further support.
     Plantinga shapes the notion of an innate spiritual sense to fit the
position he was already committed to, and those in other traditions have the
same epistemic right to shape the sense differently to fit their prior
convictions. Everyone again ends up being minimally rational, whatever
their religious tradition’s basic doctrines. Being rational in holding one’s
beliefs is less difficult to justify than trying to justify one’s beliefs as
superior to others’ beliefs. But the great diversity of religious and
nonreligious views is not what one would expect if any religious beliefs
were “properly basic.” And if there are rival sets of allegedly “properly
basic beliefs,” the sheer symmetry of the situation strongly suggests that
none are in fact “basic,” let alone “properly basic,” but only increases the
need for a defense of one’s beliefs. One cannot exempt one’s own beliefs
from a need for reasons by calling them alone “properly basic” once one is
aware of competitors in the same position as oneself. Each competitor has
as much right to claim that its beliefs are “properly basic.” The pluralism of
conflicting beliefs extends even to different theistic religions and
subtraditions: they may all have the supposed sensus divinitatis functioning
properly, yet they still end up with beliefs deemed reliably formed that
conflict. And for Plantinga to claim that the sense is functioning properly
only when mystics reach the doctrines he happens to accept is obviously
question-begging, and members of the other traditions could make the same
claim for their doctrines. He would have to present more arguments for why
nontheistic mystics are not in fact in the same epistemic situation as
Christian mystics with their conflicting beliefs. Indeed, if only one set of
beliefs of one theistic religion is in fact epistemically superior, then all the
other theistic sets based on the same “sense of the divine” are in some way
wrong. This means that the majority of mankind is wrong on religious
matters—but then the alleged “sense of the divine” is not a reliable means
for formulating “basic beliefs,” unlike sense-experience, since the majority
of people are in fact misled by it in their religious beliefs.
      As things stand now, mystics of the various religious traditions of the
world appear to be relying on their own equally compelling experiences and
similar conceptual resources, and thus they appear to be epistemic peers or
at least in the same position to deny that other mystics are epistemically
superior. That is, one does not have to advance a compelling argument that
Christian or other beliefs are very likely to be untrue; rather, one only has to
note that mystics in all well-established traditions are just as entitled to
claim that they are in a epistemologically superior position to realize that
none are. The burden would be on anyone claiming to elevate their
epistemic position above others to justify why that is so. Simply asserting
that one set of religious beliefs is superior to all others without some
independent and non-question-begging argument would be arbitrary and not
grounds to claim any epistemic superiority. Without independent arguments
showing that apparent competitors are not epistemic peers, we will end up
with a relativism of “properly basic beliefs,” and in such circumstances no
one would be warranted in claiming that one group of mystics is in a
superior position to others. In the presence of equally rational alternatives,
no set of beliefs in religious matters is exempt from a need for argument—
i.e., none are “basic.” Personal certainty is not enough: one’s experiences,
no matter how vivid or intense, and one’s conviction that no other religious
beliefs could possibly be superior, do not warrant believing that one’s
beliefs are epistemically superior to others without an actual comparison of
the various practices of belief-formation. Other mystics’ experiences are
equally vivid and compelling for them. Only after one has gone through the
trouble of actually examining the epistemic situations of all competitors
could one possibly be warranted in believing others are not one’s peers in
this regard. One cannot simply retreat into one’s faith and fiat.
      In sum, those who privilege Christian beliefs under Plantinga’s
approach cannot present a response to people who do not share the alleged
theistic sensus divinitatis but appear equally well-grounded both in
experiences and arguments. We end up with a relativism of competing
“divine senses” and allegedly “properly basic beliefs” and equally rational
believers. But, if anything, this shows that Christian beliefs, and by
extension any other religious beliefs, are not “properly basic” but in need of
further rational support—when everyone can claim that their beliefs are
privileged, none are. One may argue that Buddhism is in a stronger position
than theistic traditions since it has fewer transcendent ontic commitments
(see Webb 2015), but mystical experiences may in fact involve more than
Buddhists claim and so Buddhists too are in the same position of having to
justify their doctrines. In short, the commitments of any specific religious
tradition still depend on beliefs that must be defended on grounds other than
faith.