Scientific and Mystical Approaches to Reality
Thus, mysticism and science may share some problems in the abstract, but
the problems in their actual contexts in each endeavor show divergences. In
fact, one must fundamentally distort the nature of mysticism and science to
see them as similar endeavors. Rather, mysticism and science deal with two
different dimensions of reality: mysticism deals with the beingness of things
in nature (the impermanence and interconnectedness of phenomena) in
extrovertive experiences and the source of the being of the self or all of the
natural world in introvertive experiences, whereas science deals with how
nature works (the natural causal structures underlying events). There may
be broad convergences between mysticism and science that any
experientially based knowledge-giving enterprises would have, and the
differences in epistemic nature may not be as great as is usually supposed
(as noted below), but the two endeavors remain distinct: there are
fundamental differences in subject-matter, purpose, method, and
knowledge-claims, even when these seem superficially similar in their
rhetoric.
      One point about science is central here: fundamental scientific research
is about how things work—i.e., scientists try to find the efficient and
material causes in nature involved in events and make claims about such
causes that ultimately depend on observations checkable by others.3 Science
is a way of questioning nature that cannot be reduced to only the theories
held at a particular moment. Scientists attempt to establish lawful patterns
in the phenomenal world through observation or experimentation; they then
use reasoning to try to identify the features in nature that may not be open
to direct experience but are responsible for the lawful changes on the
everyday level of the world.4 Under realist interpretations, scientists
identify, however approximately, real parts of the world that explain the
observed events; under antirealist interpretations, scientific claims are only
about the observed events, and we have no claim to know what we cannot
experience. The antirealist empiricists do not deny that there are real
structures at work in the world; they only claim that we cannot obtain any
knowledge of them if we cannot experience them; in short, the structures
remain a mystery. Under empiricism, all theoretical realities are rejected.
The “sparticles” of supersymmetry theory and the unexperiencable hidden
dimensions of space-time of string theory are the paradigm of this problem
today. To antirealists, scientific theories and models are at most merely
shorthand devices for connecting observations. But under theoretical
realism, science is not merely a matter of predicting new observations: it is
a matter of understanding the structures in nature—an “invisible order” of
postulated explanatory realities—and advancing theories as tentative
explanations of their mechanisms.5
      Extrovertive mystics, on the other hand, focus in altered states of mind
on the beingness of the natural world and not on the features in nature
structuring beingness, or indeed on the individual nature of anything within
the world. Beingness may be called an “ontic cause,” but it is not the type
of cause of interest to scientists: it is the cause of all things’ existence, not
an efficient cause operating within the natural order that brings about
changes. Beingness is not even an Aristotelian material cause, since the
latter are different components within the natural order. That is, the
beingness of things is a “vertical” depth-cause underlying all phenomena
equally and is neutral to all matters of the “horizontal” interactions caused
by nature’s structures. Such a uniform ontic cause does not explain why one
state of affairs occurs and not another and thus does not make a scientific
difference. Mystics, that is, focus on the clayness of the clay pot of the
Upanishadic example, while scientists focus on the interactions causing
different configurations of the clay pieces. Thus, mystical experiences do
not provide any information on the causal questions of science but only
bring into awareness an ontic depth: since that depth is constant,
unchanging, and common to all things, it is neutral to all “horizontal”
interactions. Mystical states are distinct from the analytical functions of the
mind that scientists utilize in their observations and reasoning. In
extrovertive mystical experiences, there is a Gestalt-like switch from
focusing on the differentiated things within the natural realm to their
common beingness. Even extrovertive experiences of diffuse beingness
only point to the lack of distinct entities, not anything about structures. This
means that mystical experiences cannot supply new information confirming
or refuting any scientific claims about causal structures. The only new data
mystical experiences can supply on any scientific issue are new mental
states or functions for neuroscientists to study (as discussed in chapter 4).
      Thus, mysticism and science are not matters of different interpretations
of the same aspect of reality; they involve different aspects. Extrovertive
mystics make claims about the impermanence and interconnectedness of the
macro-objects we directly experience in the everyday world, not about
features of the submicroscopic world that they have not experienced, even
if these may be the causes of what is experienced. Introvertive mystics look
at an entirely different dimension to reality: a transcendent reality that in the
depth-mystical experience is traditionally interpreted as either the ground of
the self, the source of the universe’s being, or God. Beingness is not a
different level of structures that scientists simply cannot reach externally—
it is an aspect of reality that is free of differentiations. Scientists focus
precisely on the differentiations within nature that mystics bypass. Thus, it
is hard to argue that mystics and scientists approach the same aspect of
reality, or to see mystics as making claims about the underlying features of
nature that scientists are revealing regarding the causes of things.
      Scientists learn by observing and thinking about how things interact,
while mystics still the analytical mind and reveal the unchanging beingness
common to all things. Scientific experiences remain ordinary, everyday-
type perceptions, even when scientists are measuring extraordinary parts of
nature through technology-enhanced means; mystics’ experiences are
extraordinary even when they are perceiving the ordinary. To determine
how things work, scientists need to distinguish objects and see how they
interact with each other; they do not focus on the common beingness of
things or bits of matter in isolation, and for this, differentiations among
phenomena are necessary. This includes fields and the smaller and smaller
bits of matter being theorized—particle physicists are not interested in the
beingness of fields or bits of matter, but only in what is measurable by the
interaction of objects. Even the mass of an object is measured only by the
interaction of objects.
      Scientists cannot make claims about any undifferentiated aspect of
reality. Since beingness is uniform for all particulars, it cannot be
experimented on to see how it would interact with something else or be
otherwise measured. There is no way to conduct tests on what is free of
distinctions and common to everything; hence, no hypotheses about the
nature of beingness can be scientifically tested in any way. Conversely,
there can be no experimental support for any of the mystics’ assertions
concerning being, since there can be no experiments or any other types of
scientific observations or analyses that reveal the nature of anything
uniform in nature. Thus, scientists cannot reveal anything about the nature
of the beingness, and so scientific findings simply cannot contribute to the
mystical understandings of reality. They cannot supply any evidence
confirming or refuting any mystical claim about the thus-ness of things or a
purported source. In short, nothing scientists can do can provide a reason
for accepting or rejecting a mystical claim about being. Nor is there any
empirical way to test mystics’ specific doctrinal metaphysical claims, such
as Advaita’s claim that all is Brahman about the nature of any transcendent
reality.
      Thus, the uniformity of beingness and its lack of interacting parts
preclude mystical claims being checkable by scientific methods or tested by
any other empirical methods.6 Nor is new information about beingness
revealed in new mystical experiences, since there are no new parts or causes
to reveal about beingness. There is no way to devise new depth-mystical
experiences to test something about beingness—all depth-mystical
experiences are simply the same experiences empty of differentiable
content repeated over and over again. This distinguishes mysticism from
science as a way of knowing. But because beingness is free of
differentiations and for that reason not open to scientific study, mystic are
not making scientific claims about the world. Thus, the naturalists’ regular
criticism of mysticism—that mystics have not discovered anything new
about the world in a thousand years—does not apply: mystics are not trying
to do what scientists do and failing; rather, they are looking at another
aspect of reality that has no new experiential features to be discovered
through research. It is not surprising then that they are not gaining new
knowledge about the world that can be checked against empirical
predictions when the knowledge gained in mystical experiences is about an
aspect of reality that is not open to scientific measurement. Mystics simply
do not engage beingness or transcendent realities the way scientists engage
the world.7
      So do scientists and mystics experience and discuss the same reality?
Yes and no. Scientists and extrovertive mystics do experience the same
phenomenal world, but they experience different aspects of it, and in that
sense they do not experience the same realities. But scientists and mystics
approach the world in distinctly different ways and with different subject-
matters, and thus science and mysticism are different ways of knowing
reality. Scientists are interested in the “what-ness” of objects (what
categories we put things into) and the “how-ness” of what makes things tick
(how things work or came to be), but not in the sheer “thus-ness” of things
(being) that is the domain of mystics.
      This distinction in subject-matter between reality’s beingness and the
causes organizing it—a distinction going back to Aristotle—must be
maintained in studying the relation of mysticism to science. Scientific and
mystical insights are not of the same type because structure and beingness,
while both real, are different and cannot be reduced to only one type of
reality. Thus, scientists and mystics are not arriving at the same destination
through different routes but are working on different subjects that remain
analytically distinguishable. In short, mystical experiences do not give us
any scientific knowledge of reality, and no science gives us any mystical
knowledge. So too, mystical knowledge-claims, being uncheckable
empirically, are different in character from science. Thus, the endeavors are
both interested in knowing reality, but they approach different aspects of it
and so do not infringe on each other in their central concerns. The two
endeavors cannot be treated as if they are saying the same thing in
“different languages” (contra, e.g., Mansfield 2008: 88, 141, 162). It is
simply wrong to claim that scientists and mystics “are really expressing the
same insight—one in the technical language of science, the other in the
poetic, metaphorical language of spirituality” (Capra 2000: 8) when they
are dealing with fundamentally different aspects of reality and doing
different things.