Applying Occam’s Razor
The compatibility of scientific explanations and the possibility of mystical
insights means that there is no forced either/or choice between accepting
mystical experiences as either neurological events or authentic cognitive
awareness of reality—the experiences may in fact be both. Naturalists
might concede this point and admit that science alone cannot determine the
issue of cognitivity. But they would then turn to philosophical grounds to
reject any transcendent option, starting with Occam’s razor. That is, they
will counter that it is improper to invoke a transcendent reality when an
ontologically simpler explanation in terms of natural factors alone does the
same job. If scientists can duplicate all the phenomenological aspects of a
mystical experience by drugs or other natural means, why should we think
that a transcendent reality is ever involved? The naturalists’ position also
brings coherence to our picture of the mind: no special mental function is
needed for these experiences—mystical experiences are explainable in
terms of the same ordinary mental capacities that explain all our other
experiences, even if naturalists may have to argue that the brain is
malfunctioning during these experiences. This, they argue, at least puts the
burden of proof on advocates of transcendent realism to show that
transcendent explanations are needed when plausible natural explanations
either already exist or at least the inklings of them are being established and
it is only a question of when, not if, a complete natural explanation will be
forthcoming. Thus, they argue that even if the scientific accounts do not
absolutely rule out a transcendent cause as impossible, such accounts do at
least render such a cause more unlikely than natural explanations since
ordinary natural factors can accomplish precisely the same thing, and thus
there is no reason to invoke a transcendent reality. Natural explanations thus
are the best available option.
      And naturalism does seem to have the initial advantage on this point.
Surely a laboratory duplication of all of a mystical experience through
natural means (if in fact this is possible) would at least count prima facie
against the idea that some experiences have a nonnatural cause. In addition,
the naturalists’ monism is ontologically simpler than ontic dualisms of this
world and transcendent realities, and, everything else being equal, we do
believe that the universe is more likely set up with a simpler ontology. In
naturalism, no new entities or processes are involved. The religious
introduce an entirely new order of reality, and with it a new mystery that the
religious probably never will be able to solve: how a transcendent reality
could act in nature. Naturalists have no corresponding mystery.
      But advocates of transcendent realism will counter that we make
exceptions to the principle of parsimony when we think we have reasons to
believe that it does not apply. Everyone agrees that it is not a violation of
Occam’s razor where a more complex phenomenon requires a more
complicated explanation—no one in chemistry accepts Thales’s claim “all
is water” even though it is simple. Most obviously, we think sense-
experience requires reference to sense-objects to be complete, even though
solipsism is ontologically much simpler. Transcendent realists argue that a
similar exception is needed here: they argue that there are compelling
reasons other than these experiences to believe that transcendent realities
exist; and if such realities do exist, explanations of the neurological
mechanisms of experiencers undergoing mystical experiences do not cover
all that is actually involved in the experiences. To naturalists, this is
precisely the type of situation where Occam’s razor should apply, but to the
religious the naturalists’ account of the universe is not simple but simplistic
and should be rejected.
      In addition, transcendent realists will argue that at least introvertive
mystical experiences are indeed unique mental events, and so these
obviously require their own explanation—to treat them as any other
experience would be to distort them. Thus, transcendent realists argue,
asking for a unique explanation of these experiences is not a strategy
designed simply to protect certain religious beliefs but something that
reflects what in fact needs explaining. Transcendent realists argue that
naturalists consider their own explanations satisfactory only because these
explanations account for all of the aspects that naturalists think on
metaphysical grounds are actually involved, but all that scientists may be
accounting for are the conditions that permit a mystical experience to occur.
Naturalists consider the fact that they can predict on physiological or
sociocultural grounds when a mystical experience is likely to occur to be
very pertinent—it shows that only natural factors are at work—but
transcendent realists consider that fact to be irrelevant to the issue since
they too can accept such findings. The science would not demonstrate a true
trigger that would compel the transcendent to become manifest in the
mystic’s mind but would only be identifying the conditions present when a
transcendent reality infuses an experiencer. The key to any explanation is
that it makes us believe that we understand why what occurred did occur. A
transcendent reality is an explanation in that way, even though the fact that
a transcendent reality cannot be empirically tested forecloses it as a possible
scientific explanatory posit.
      Indeed, since naturalists think in terms of scientific explanations only,
there will be a permanent dispute between transcendent realists and
naturalists here. At a minimum, the principle of parsimony should be taken
as favoring naturalism only if we have other grounds to favor naturalism.
Standing alone, the principle is merely located at the center of the basic
metaphysical dispute. Similarly, other pertinent philosophical arguments
will also end up being grounded in matters of a conflict of metaphysics and
thus beyond the scope of a scientific resolution.