Methodological Issues
Today the focus of the study of mysticism is typically on phenomena
connected to unique “mystical experiences.” (The modern sense of
“mysticism” and its study will be clarified in the first two chapters.) Any
focus on individuals’ experiences is out of step with postmodernism’s focus
on cultures as a whole, on texts, and on issues of social and political power.
To postmodernists, the focus on experiences reflects only modern concerns
about the self and the loss of traditional sources of authority. Nevertheless,
science suggests that what postmodernists disparage as the “experientialist
approach” is a legitimate subject: experiencers and their brain states during
mystical experiences are subjects of neuroscientific study today, and there is
neurological evidence suggesting distinctive mystical experiences. If so,
mystical experiences should also be a legitimate topic for phenomenology
and philosophical reflection. In addition, philosophical reflection on
whether such experiences are veridical and on what role they may play in
the development and defense of doctrines cannot be dismissed simply
because it arose only in the modern era—again, merely because the
questions are new does not make them illegitimate or unanswerable when
looking at modern and premodern cultural phenomena.
      But studying mysticism involves more than just the study of mystical
experiences. For this, we have to rely on texts from different eras and
cultures from around the world. Some scholars reject the need for any
empathetic approach in favor of focusing exclusively on what can be
observed and measured and thus what mystics actually say can be ignored.
But philosophers are interested in what mystics claim about knowledge and
values. One problem is unique to studying mysticism: the role of allegedly
“empty” yet cognitive experiences. Do we need to have mystical
experiences to study mysticism? Can nonmystics meaningfully study
mysticism? There is the basic problem of studying claims based on
experiences that many scholars have not had. But if we can understand
mystics’ claims without having had a mystical experience of any kind, then
such an experience is not a necessary prerequisite to studying mysticism.
Nonmystics would be in the position of a blind physicist studying light, but
if they can understand mystical claims then the study of mysticism by
nonmystics would not be ruled out.
      So can nonmystics understand mystics’ claims? The question of the
truth or falsity of such claims would be bracketed at this initial stage. All
any philosopher can do is focus on the mystics’ writings and public actions.
Getting into another person’s mind may be impossible, but understanding
what is said in texts does not require this: meaning is objective in the sense
that it is independent of the authors’ inner life but expressed in public terms
that others can understand and thus is open to scrutiny by others. That is,
we can get at the meaning of claims even if we cannot now see the full
significance of these claims to the practitioners. Nor is it obvious that it is
necessary to belong to a given mystic’s tradition to understand his or her
claims. That is, outsiders can view mystical claims in terms of the meaning
that a mystic gives a text if we have a sufficient amount of his or her
writings and other texts from that culture and era, and thus an outsider’s
understanding is possible to the extent that such meaning is objective. That
there were debates in India between rival schools does not prove that they
understood each other’s claims without being a member of that tradition
since there is a very real possibility that the debaters created straw figures
and simply talked past each other without engaging each other’s genuine
positions. But less than a conversion is needed to understand—indeed, we
would have to have some understanding of the claims before any
conversion could occur in order to appreciate what we would be converting
to. We cannot assume that because we come from another culture that no
such understanding is possible—i.e., that we cannot suspend our
understanding of the world enough that through study we could come to
understand another point of view. Thus, some initial understanding does
seem possible (although this issue will return in chapters 3 and 6). Any role
of mystical experiences in developing mystical doctrines does not rule this
out. The alternative is that the entire study of history is impossible—e.g., no
one today could understand a Southern slave owner’s point of view in the
American Civil War, and so there is no point in studying the Civil War. The
presence of exotic experiences may increase the difficulty in understanding
mystical claims, but it does not rule out the possibility of such
understanding.
      A related issue is that, even if a mystical experience is not required to
understand mystics’ claims, must scholars at least be mystically minded to
understand them? Or is there a low threshold for understanding mystical
claims? Can scholars be “mystically unmusical,” as Max Weber claimed to
be concerning religion, and still understand mystical claims? One does get
the sense from reading many philosophers on mysticism that they have no
feel for the subject at all and that their only knowledge of the subject comes
from reading other philosophers on mysticism—the closest they have
approached a mystical text is reading the snippets in William James’s The
Variety of Religious Experiences. Nothing suggests in most philosophical
works that the author had had any mystical experiences or had practiced in
a mystical tradition. Such a limited background would be unacceptable in
any other field of philosophy. Anyone whose knowledge of science came
only from reading other philosophers of science would not have much of
value to contribute in that field. At best, all they could do is point out errors
in philosophers’ reasoning that anyone ignorant of science could do, but
they could not advance our understanding of science in any way. Only one
who has practiced a scientific discipline or extensively studied primary
sources would be qualified to add to the field. And the same should apply in
philosophy of mysticism. Having a mystical experience would no doubt
help in understanding mystics’ claims on one level. But note that even
mystics themselves must describe their experiences and make doctrinal
claims only outside introvertive experiences in “dualistic” states of
consciousness. They are then separated in time from the experiences and
see them from a distance. So too, mystics themselves can assess whether
their experiences are genuine and determine the role their own mystical
experiences play in justifying their claims only outside introvertive mystical
experiences.
      As discussed in chapter 3, being a mystic does not necessarily qualify
one to see the various issues involved in making claims to knowledge. In
fact, any strong emotional impact that mystics feel from these experiences
may make it harder for them to examine their own experiences and claims
critically and to avoid an unwarranted sense of certainty in their own
particular interpretation of their experiences. Thus, a philosophical
examination is especially important in this field. The fundamental role that
a religious commitment plays in one’s life may also adversely affect one’s
objectivity in assessing the truth of mystical claims and the causes of
mystical experiences. Would that interfere with understanding claims from
an alien religion or era? If the religiously committed cannot be objective,
does this not also mean that committed nonreligious naturalists also cannot
be objective? Must one favor one’s own tradition and disparage others?
However, it does seem possible to be both empathetic in order initially to
understand mystics’ claims from other cultures and eras, and also open-
minded enough to judge the possible truth or falsity of the claims
subsequently, regardless of one’s personal broader commitments. That is
sufficient here. To test the results, all one can do is present one’s claims and
see how others within and outside various traditions judge them.
      Philosophers are asking questions that mystics themselves may not
have asked, but this does not invalidate those questions or make it
impossible to infer answers. However, one must be cautious regarding any
answer advanced. No one can help but approach any subject from one’s
own contemporary cultural background. Today one basic problem for
anyone who has been influenced by modern science is that we see the world
through the lens of modern science. This can lead to distorting mysticism,
as has happened with many New Age advocates (see Jones 2010,
forthcoming). Moreover, a strong argument can be made that since the
advent of modern science we can never see the world the way that
premodern people did. We simply are not capable of experiencing the
“sacred world” of the medieval Christians, let alone experiencing the world
as early Buddhists, Hindus, or Daoists experienced it. The modern emphasis
on the subjective in religion and on individualism in general also may affect
our ability to enter into another person’s world of meaning. But we still may
be able to understand what others are saying without experiencing the world
as they do. Nevertheless, in the end, the best one can do is to make clear
what questions one is asking and to try to support the answers. This bears
on the problem of translations of mystical texts from premodern and non-
Western cultures. Philosophers see problems in any translation over the
alleged incommensurability of concepts. The anthropologist Clifford Geertz
quipped in response that translating, like riding a bike, is something that is
easier to do that say. I am familiar with the problems in trying to translate
classical Buddhist and Hindu Sanskrit texts into English. A translator can
never be certain that he or she is conveying what the authors truly meant.
The possibility of mystical experiences informing these texts intensifies the
issue. But this problem does not appear insurmountable if one looks at a
large segment of a given mystic’s work in the context of his or her tradition
and culture. Simply reading brief snippets or isolated statements in
translation cannot be the sum of one’s research since one’s general theory of
mysticism would then control one’s understanding rather than letting the
data build understanding. The possibility that we may inadvertently make
other people into mirror images of ourselves cannot be ignored, but this
does not mean that in principle we cannot understand others’ claims or that
we must unconsciously always see claims in our own terms. People today
can in principle grasp the basic outlook of premoderns through study. We
can see what they are saying in their own terms without accepting their
claims. That classical mystics typically believe that their own tradition is
epistemically superior may make them feel exempt from being placed in the
same boat with mystics from other traditions. But we can understand a
claim and reject it, arguing instead that, based on the comparison of the
epistemic position of different mystical traditions, no tradition begins in a
privileged position. That will be the approach adopted here: all mystics will
be treated as being in the same epistemic position until shown otherwise for
other than theological reasons.