Naturalists by definition deny the existence of transcendent realities—all of
reality for them is open to scientific scrutiny—but they can accept that a
genuine contentless experience occurs and give it the first explanation.
Theists can give that experience the theistic interpretation, but again this
does not make the experience a differentiated theistic introvertive
experience. Since most people are theists of one stripe or another, “union
with God” is probably the most common interpretation, but this does not
mean that there is anything differentiable or personal in the depth-
experience itself. (The question of “union” will be addressed in chapter 5.)
Any bliss that results from the mind being empty and inactive may well be
seen by theists after the fact as being fully loved by a god deemed to be
limitless and loving—“bliss” becomes “blessed.” As discussed above,
theists may also have theistic extrovertive experiences that are felt in terms
of the presence of God in his creation. Thus, to theists three types of
mystical experiences are theistic.
                        Mystical Enlightenment
In his Enlightenment Ain’t What It Appears to Be (2010), Robert Forman
makes it clear that having a depth-mystical experience need not transform a
person: if one is neurotic, depressed, or a jerk before the experience, one
may well remain exactly the same after the experience fades. Emotions may
continue as before. Of the four people in the West who convinced
Agehananda Bharati that they had had the “zero-experience,” one was a real
estate salesman who continued to sell real estate afterward (1976: 226–27).
As Forman says, all that has occurred is an unmingling of background
consciousness from its ordinary content. All one may have done is
discovered that there is more to reality—a witnessing consciousness
independent of the observed content and the sense of a subject sensing. This
discovery need not change one’s ordinary consciousness or one’s character
once one returns to dualistic consciousness; the experience may expand
what one accepts as real about oneself but nothing more. In addition, if one
has a strong sense of self-importance, that may well be strengthened by
losing a sense of the phenomenal ego and having a depth-experience that is
interpreted as the ground of an independent self. So too, a depth-mystical
experience need not produce a transformation toward selflessness: any
effects may be short-lived or even nonexistent if one decides that the
experience is delusory. This possibility is especially great when mystical
experiences occur spontaneously. (That the enlightened need not be morally
transformed will be discussed in chapter 9.) So too, extrovertive mystical
experiences may seem bewildering and lead to confusion and distress if
they occur outside a religious framework that gives them meaning (Byrd,
Lear, & Schwenka 2000: 267–68).
     But the mystical quest may also lead to a psychological transformation
of the person that initiates a new way of living. A mystical insight may be
internalized and become part of one’s cognitive and dispositional
framework. When this transformation involves completely ending any sense
of an individual ego in the phenomenal world by means of the mystical
cultivation discussed above, it is “mystical enlightenment.”21 Mystical
enlightenment is not an isolated experience but this enduring state of
consciousness. (Thus, merely having a contentless introvertive experience
by itself will not be referred to here as “enlightenment.”) It is a
psychological and epistemic change, not an ontic one—one realizes what
has always been the case. It involves knowledge of the fundamental nature
of reality (as defined by the mystic’s tradition) and subsequently living in
accordance with reality (normally by following the ethics of the mystic’s
tradition). Since beliefs and values from different traditions figure in
enlightenment, there is no one abstract “state of enlightenment” but
different enlightened states. Indeed, the state differs from person to person:
the knowledge each mystic brings to enlightenment will structure his or her
awareness differently. Different enlightened mystics make different
knowledge-claims and then take their experiences as experiential
confirmation of those claims. Thus, “enlightenment,” like “mysticism,” is
an abstract category covering diverse actual phenomena. But all such states
have ending a sense of a phenomenal ego in common. (It should also be
noted that the enlightened state can be lost.)
      Mystical enlightenment is not the goal of all religions since salvation
may be defined in other terms, but it may be one way to perfect a tradition’s
religious virtues or to attain a state not attained by all believers. In classical
introvertive mysticism, enlightenment involves an insight into the
underlying self or the source of the natural realm. One no longer identifies
with one’s thoughts and emotions—these are merely products of the
phenomenal ego and not the true self. In extrovertive mysticism,
enlightenment is different: its insight involves seeing the lack of any
separate, independent ego cut off from the rest of the natural realm—there
is no inner ego thinking our thoughts but only the thoughts. One also sees
all of this realm as it truly is: free of distinct objects, interconnected, and in
constant flux. In both cases, there is a transformed state of consciousness
involving an insight into the nature of phenomenal reality.
      Thus, the enlightened state of mind is constituted by an abiding sense
of fundamental reality. In introvertive mysticism, our everyday sense of a
distinct socially constructed ego is replaced by the continuous inflowing of
what is deemed the ground of either the true self or all of reality (depending
on the particular mystic’s beliefs), and one acts accordingly. The result is a
continuous mystical awareness. After an introvertive experience, the
enlightened do not return to the normal sense of a self but to a selfless state
with sense-perceptions. Thus, the introvertive enlightened state can be seen
as a continual state of mindfulness, but it is one in contact with an alleged
transcendent reality. It is a continuing state of consciousness with an inner
calm even while the person is engaged in thought and activity—i.e., one
remains centered in beingness while still remaining fully conscious of
thoughts and sensations. But in all cases, the sense of a separate
phenomenal ego is replaced by a sense of a true reality. (Any sense that “I
am enlightened” imposes a dualism on reality and shows that one is not
enlightened. See chapter 7.) More theistic- and depth-mystical experiences
may occur, and the enlightened state may be further deepened by these
experiences or by mindfulness. In fact, mystics often attach little
significance to an event inaugurating the enlightened state since it is the
latter state that matters. Nor is becoming enlightened always treated as an
end. In Christianity, it may be treated as only a stage in the continuing long-
term development of one’s relation to God. In Zen Buddhism, after a
satori/kensho one continues to practice zazen meditation as before, just as
the Buddha did, without a thought of a goal. But with the sense of a
separately existing ego eradicated in enlightenment, a new stage of life has
begun.
      The change that enlightenment entails is a transformation of the whole
inner life of a person—cognition, motivations, desires, emotions,
dispositions. Emotions based on the false sense of an ego (such as the
passions, fear, anger, and anxiety) melt away as one realizes the true state of
things and accepts them for what they are. Thus, one’s inner life is
completely reorganized. The mere intellectual acceptance of a proposition is
not enough—we do not need a mystical experience to accept that “all is
impermanent” or that we are all tiny specks in one interconnected natural
whole with no ontologically distinct entities, or to follow the analogy of a
dream and its dreamer to envision there being a reality underlying all of this
world. But only with a mystical experience can we experience the world as
it truly is. The variety of enlightened ways of life from different traditions
suggests that doctrines and values are internalized in these states of
consciousness, even if depth-mystical experiences are devoid of all
conceptualizations. But even if beliefs and values are internalized in the
enlightened state from the religious tradition in which the enlightened
trained, the enlightened now know them to be true in a way they did not
before. The persistent sense of permanence among inner and outer
phenomena is uprooted, and one now actually sees in a nonconceptualized
experience that the world is impermanent. In the Buddhist analogy, it is the
difference between an intellectual acceptance of the idea that water will
relieve thirst and actually drinking water (Samyutta Nikaya 2.115).
Naturalists may accept that, say, everything is made of one beingness, but
only by “drinking the water” do mystics see that it is true and integrate it
into how they live. Such a reconstruction of a person, not any exotic
experiences for their own sake, is the concern of mystical ways of life. In
sum, enlightenment is related to living in the awareness of the ground of
reality, not merely to the intellectual grasp of an idea or to an intellectual
conclusion inferred from some religious or philosophical ideas. Conversely,
falling out of enlightenment involves not simply forgetting some
knowledge-claims—it is a change in one’s state of consciousness and way
of being.
      Becoming enlightened may be the result of a gradual spiritual
development in which the sense of selflessness is finally completed with no
special “enlightenment experience.” But there may also be a sudden
enlightenment experience—a flash of insight, accompanied by joy and the
surprise of being hit by the unexpected. (“Sudden enlightenment” is not
necessarily a spontaneous mystical experience—it too may have been
preceded by arduous training for a long period of time.) But it is important
to note that the insight producing enlightenment occurs outside a depth-
mystical experience or the “lucid trances” (jhanas) of Buddhist
concentrative meditation (the last of which is formless and contentless): it is
an insight into the selfless nature of reality that can occur only when
phenomena have returned. Advaitins disconnect the depth-experience as the
cause of the insight that all is Brahman. Nor can any event or act force this
transformation of consciousness. Even repeated depth-mystical experiences
cannot force such a transformation: no self-effort can cause the state of
selflessness any more than it can cause mystical experiences. To emphasize
the difference in the knowledge allegedly given in these experiences from
that given in sense-experience and reasoning, mystics often use terms such
as “spiritual gnosis” or even “nonknowledge” (to distinguish this
knowledge from everyday knowledge) or “intellect” (to distinguish the
mental function involved in mystical experiences from sense experience
and reasoning). To stress the transcendent’s otherness, mystics often claim
that both the experience and the reality experienced in mystical experiences
are ineffable (see chapter 6).
      The serenity accompanying mystical illumination is often described as
joy, but it usually is not the exuberance normally connected with that
concept. Nor is it the happiness of the fulfillment of personal desires.22
There is a sense of peace, contentment, and happiness at whatever is—
hence, the common term “bliss.”23 There is a shifting of the emotional
center toward loving and harmonious affections, toward “yes, yes” and
away from “no” where claims of the non-ego are concerned (James 1958:
216–17). There may or may not be an accompanying sense of awe, beauty,
wonder, or amazement at the beingness of the world. The inner calm or
coolness of not being troubled by the vicissitudes of life through
“detachment” is the principal emotion connected to living a mystical life
aligned with “reality as it truly is.” Strong emotional responses (e.g., rage,
anxiety, or passion) are squelched. But not all emotions are deadened:
temporary joys and sorrows may still occur (and physical pains and
pleasures no doubt still occur), but they are now greeted with an “even-
minded” acceptance and thus can no longer dominate the inner life. The
Daoist Zhuangzi saw his own grieving over the death of his wife as
improper and countered by celebrating. But in the end mystics neither
grieve or celebrate: they have an inner calm free of the effects of the events
swirling around them.
      With enlightenment, the experiences and actions we have in the natural
world still remain: sensory and conceptual content is present in the mind.
Even under Advaita, the enlightened cannot help but see diversity.
Advaitins have had trouble reconciling their nondual metaphysics with this
persistence of a perception of diversity after enlightenment. Shankara
admitted that the “dream” world of multiplicity does not disappear for the
enlightened, comparing the situation to a person with an eye disease seeing
two moons even though he knows there is really only one (Brahma-sutra-
bhashya 4.1.15). Thus, the enlightened see a differentiated realm, not the
undifferentiated Brahman. They overcome the perception of duality only
during periods of introvertive one-pointed concentration (samadhi).
      This also means that the enlightened have not escaped the world into a
trance, nor are they otherwise incapacitated. That the enlightened, despite
their new awareness and the inner stillness at the core of their being, still
live in a world of distinctions is evidenced by the fact that many teach
others and leave writings. Speaking involves words, and any language
necessarily makes distinctions. While the enlightened’s ability to use
language may be in abeyance during certain mystical experiences, their
ability to use language in the enlightened state shows that they do in fact
make and understand distinctions. However, unlike the unenlightened, the
enlightened do not project the language’s conceptual distinctions onto
reality. Thereby, they avoid the creation of a false worldview of multiple
discrete, “real” objects. That is, they can draw linguistic distinctions
concerning the flux of phenomena without seeing ontic distinctions as the
result. In the Zen story, the unenlightened see mountains; with extrovertive
mystical experiences, the mountains are no longer mountains (i.e., it is seen
that there are no distinct objects for the term “mountains” to apply to); but
then in the enlightened state, mountains once again are mountains (i.e., the
enlightened can use the term without projecting the idea that there are
distinct objects in the world). Thereby, they can use language to navigate in
the world of diversity. So too, Zen Buddhists continue to think in the state
they call “non-thinking”—they simply do not make the discriminated
phenomena into reified objects. The enlightened can see a white piece of
paper and use the concepts “white” and “paper” without thinking or seeing
the paper as an independent object in the world distinct from other
phenomena and distinct from the wood pulp it is made of, or seeing
whiteness as a reality distinct from the paper that makes it white.
      Thus, with enlightenment there still is sensory input and conceptual
structuring in the world of diversity, not a pure mindfulness. But the
enlightened remain in touch with the reality they have experienced, and
they now engage the world with a new mental clarity and calmness. Thus,
two layers of consciousness are now operating in them: the depth and the
surface. Their lives are reoriented around how reality is now perceived.
They greet all circumstances without distractions. They now live in the
world in a state of freedom from the attachments and concerns generated by
a false sense of an individual ego—they act literally selflessly, i.e., free of a
sense of self.24 Their experience of the world is still mediated by conceptual
structuring, but that structuring is not taken as representing a pluralistic
world of distinct items ontologically cut off from each other. There is an
openness to whatever occurs. The enlightened live with all attention
focused on the present, free of the background noise produced by the
dichotomizing mind. They act toward what is presented spontaneously and
effortlessly without reflection as their way of life and values dictate,
indifferent to success or failure. All the actions of the enlightened are non-
self-assertive actions (wuwei) automatically following the Way and not
assertions of personal interests. Think of the Daoist story of Ding the cook
carving an ox: with his ego gone, he automatically followed the spaces in
the joints without resistance and thus never dulled his knife. In Zen, the
action is called “nondual” because there is no sense of a duality of
independently real actor and action.
     Since the enlightened are no longer imposing their will on things, they
often have the reaction common to dying people who accept their
impending death: with no self-image to maintain, they are free of any self-
preoccupation; their values and attitude toward death may change; they
have nothing to lose and no needs to fulfill; they have no feeling of needing
to do anything; often they feel an all-encompassing, impersonal love or joy
and a tremendous sensitivity to other people’s feelings and sufferings.