The Possibility of Mystical Insight
Of the three philosophical approaches discussed here, two deny any special
mystical experiences, and all three let doctrines negate the possibility that
mystical experiences might provide some unique, genuine knowledge of
reality. Even if any “mystical experiences” remain after their analyses, the
possibility that they might give knowledge is ruled out—any cognitive
content can be supplied only by cultural sources uninfluenced by mystical
experiences. However, none of the three philosophical positions prove to be
convincing. At most, they show that we have to examine both the
experience and the cultural contexts to understand mystical knowledge-
claims, not that such claims must be ruled out a priori. Whether such claims
can be shown to be true or false will be the subject of the next two chapters.
                                      3

                 Are Mystical Experiences Cognitive?




A religious way of life is not simply a matter of accepting a set of
knowledge-claims or ideal values, but how one actually lives. Being
religious cuts to one’s very identity regardless of the doctrines held or
rituals followed. Doctrines and creeds may articulate the content of one’s
faith, but they are not the substance of it. Nevertheless, mystical
experiences allegedly do give knowledge about fundamental realities,
thereby enabling one to live in accord with the way things really are. All
classical mystical traditions contain explicit and implicit claims about the
ultimate nature of both the world and persons that are meant to depict the
way reality truly is. These doctrines articulate what one is prepared to
accept if challenged.
      Whether mystical claims are valid or justified is the central
philosophical issue here. Are cognitive experiences limited to sense-
experiences and self-awareness, or do mystical states of consciousness
reveal something about the universe that our ordinary, baseline state of
consciousness cannot?1 Do mystical experiences provide insights into
reality, or are they purely “subjective” with no contact with any reality other
than the brain? Do mystical insights trump claims made from ordinary
experiences? Are they more certain than sense-experiences? Do mystical
experiences offer any “objective” evidence for belief-claims, i.e., grounds
that even opponents concede are a reason to accept certain beliefs (even
though the opponents will not accept them as compelling)? Are extrovertive
mystics justified in claiming that things in the everyday world are
ontologically connected and that there is no ego? Are their experiences at
least some empirical evidence supporting those claims? Are introvertive
mystics justified in the implicit claim to have experienced a transcendent
reality and in their explicit claims about the nature of what is experienced?
How can a nonconceptual, objectless experience be cognitive? How do we
know mystics are not having delusions? Do conflicting mystical doctrines
mean that the experiences have no cognitive value? Are there grounds
independent of mystical experiences that justify or refute their claims about
what is real? Are some mystical claims epistemically superior to others?
Strict evidentialists in philosophy object that if there is no clear evidence in
favor of transcendent realities, then it is irrational to believe in God or
another such reality. So are mystics rational in accepting their mystical
claims? Are nonmystics rational in accepting mystical claims? (Whether
natural explanations explain away mystical cognitive claims will be the
subject of the next chapter; whether mystical claims are scientifically
testable will be a subject in chapter 8.)
      The most basic set of questions are these: (1) Are mystical experiences
cognitive? That is, are there grounds to accept or to reject the basic claim
that mystical experiences are veridical and thus tell us something of the
nature of reality? Do introvertive experiences offer evidence of the
existence of some transcendent reality? (2) Do mystical experiences favor
one particular interpretation or one set of doctrines over competing claims?
(3) Are mystics at least rational in accepting their experiences as veridical
and as evidence for their particular tradition’s doctrines? (4) Are
nonmystical rational in accepting mystical claims?