Our Epistemic Situation
It follows from the above that the religious can provide an understanding of
scientific and sociocultural explanations consistent with a transcendent
realism: identifying the bases of mystical experiences does not by itself
explain away alleged mystical insights any more than identifying the social
bases for the origin of science as a social institution or the physiological
bases enabling someone to have the capacity to undertake scientific
research explains away scientific insights. Thus, the religious can endorse
scientific explanations as providing an understanding of the occurrence of
mystical experiences but never as a complete explanation of them. So too,
naturalists must accept that scientific analysis is not inherently reductionist:
scientists can provide analyses of the makeup and causes of phenomena
without making the additional metaphysical claim that only the causes are
real or that the phenomena are in any way not real (see Jones 2013: chap.
3).29 Transcendent realists will also have to accept that science per se
cannot verify their position either. Naturalists who believe that scientific
explanations refute mystical claims will have to defend their position on
considerations that are metaphysical in nature. The naturalists’ commitment
to sense-experience and science as the only means to knowledge of reality
does not get them out of this situation—indeed, this commitment itself will
have to be defended on philosophical grounds. The consequence of this is
that arguments on the beliefs and alleged insights connected to mystical
experiences or their rejection will depend on grounds other than scientific
accounts themselves.
      It should also be noted that it is not only some naturalists who believe
that science alone justified their view. Many contemporary New Age
advocates enthusiastically conclude that scientists studying the physiology
of meditators have validated age-old mystical claims.30 For example, the
general shift of mental functioning in meditation from the left to the right
brain hemisphere—a shift from the site of linguistic and analytical activity
to that of nonverbal and synthetic activity—has been popular since the
1970s as establishing a physiological basis proving the truth of mystical
claims. But the grounds of this claim are as shaky as for the naturalists’.
Science does not establish that any insights into the nature of reality
accompany the shift: the right hemisphere functioning without contact with
the left may in fact be no more than a useless spinning of mental gears
incapable of any true insight into the nature of reality; if so, any claim based
in such brain activity would then be inherently unreliable. (Also, science
does not support this position: meditation may lead to greater activity in the
brain’s right hemisphere, but the overall pattern is one of interhemispheric
integration and synchronization [Winkelman 1999: 417–18].)
      The upshot is that scientific explanations do not bear on the issue of
the possible truth of any transcendent explanations of mystical experiences
even in principle. Even if neuroscience can be taken as verifying that
distinctive mystical experiences occur, it does not either validate or
invalidate any mystical knowledge-claims related to selflessness and so
forth: merely establishing the nexus in the brain of the event and the circuits
involved is irrelevant to the issue of whether the stimulated area of the brain
permits a mystical experience of a transcendent reality to occur or whether
the experience is no more than an internal function of that mundane brain
activity. We are left with a metaphysical question: does our brain naturally
cause us to create these experiences (e.g., somehow to aid in our survival or
because of the brain is malfunctioning), or did a transcendent reality create
our brain to permit genuine experiences of a transcendent reality? To
oversimplify: if the brain is not malfunctioning, we may be hard-wired for
mystical experiences or for experiences of self-transcendence (Hamer
2005), but did God wire us to experience a transcendent reality, or did
evolution wire us just to think so because it somehow aids in our survival?
31 So too, mystical experiences may in fact be common, as sociological
research suggests, but this does not mean that a transcendent reality is
involved. A demonstrated commonality may bear on the question of
whether mystical consciousness is a more normal mental state of healthy
people than naturalists typically accept, but may not bear on the question of
the experiences’ proper explanation: even if mystical experiences are the
result of a malfunctioning brain, they still may be quite common. The
commonality of mirages does not make them any less delusional. The
frequency of such experiences is simply irrelevant to the philosophical
question of what scientific explanations accomplish.
     Some scientists who study meditators agree that their research cannot
answer such questions and thus cannot prove or disprove the existence of a
transcendent reality (e.g., Ramachandran & Blakeslee 1998: 185; Newberg,
d’Aquili, & Rause 2002: 143, 149–51, 178–79; Beauregard & O’Leary
2007: ix, 38, 276).32 It is not that they consider science incapable of settling
the broad philosophical issue of whether a transcendent reality exists.
Rather, it is a more specific issue: the neuroscientific study of experiencers
cannot settle the question of whether mystical experiences are veridical, let
alone determine the validity of any specific mystical interpretation.
Scientists studying the same data or colleagues working together may draw
diametrically opposed conclusions on the epistemic and metaphysical
implications of the data. Such conclusions are simply not part of the science
of the mechanisms, nor are they determined by the scientific results. So too,
arguing merely that demonstrating that specific brain states are associated
with mystical experience at least shows that it is reasonable to believe that
mystics are aware of a transcendent power does not help: naturalists could
just as easily argue that the demonstration shows that it is reasonable to
conclude precisely the opposite—that mystical experiences are nothing but
purely natural brain states. Neither side is being more reasonable based on
the science alone.
     However, even though a scientific identification of the biological bases
of mystical experiences does not per se prove that mystical experiences are
not genuine, it does render transcendent explanations less probable since an
alternative plausible natural explanation is in principle available. Religious
explanations are no longer indisputable or the only candidates but now must
contend with a real competitor, and so the experiences’ evidentiary force is
weakened. Of course, this in itself is not evidence against transcendent
explanations of mystical experiences. However, this does neutralize
mystical experiences as uncontested evidence of a transcendent realism.
Introvertive mystical experiences may be veridical, but if scientists can
duplicate all the features of the experiences, perhaps artificial stimulation
does not merely permit the infusion of a transcendent reality but only
natural conditions are involved. Thus, if mystical experiences can occur
whether or not a transcendent reality is present, these experiences lose any
epistemic presumption of being evidence of a transcendent reality that they
might have enjoyed in the absence of a natural explanation. These
experiences may or may not be experiences of a transcendent reality, but we
can never be confident one way or the other. In sum, these experiences are
not unambiguous evidence for transcendent realities and thus not an
objective warrant for believing in them. We are left, not with proof that
transcendent explanations are wrong or proof that some naturalist reduction
must be right, but in a more uncertain situation. Thus, the damage of a
natural explanation is not to the possibility of a genuine mystical experience
but to the experience’s philosophical value as evidence in an argument in
favor of transcendent realities.
      Transcendent realists can reply that merely because mystical
experiences are not unambiguous evidence it does not follow that they may
not in fact be genuine. And they can point to the problems discussed above
concerning natural explanations as an alternative, thus raising the issue of
whether today there is in fact an “equally plausible” alternative. At most,
natural explanations, if ever demonstrated, mean that mystical experiences
cannot be used as decisive in a deductive proof, not that mystical
experiences might not be used by the religious as part of an argument about
the best explanation of mystical phenomena.
      Thus, whether natural explanations do in fact destroy mystical
experiences’ evidential value turns on whether at present the naturalists’
option is at least as plausible as the religious ones or perhaps moreso, or
vice versa. In short, only if one side can show that the other’s argument are
today implausible or at least less plausible than its own will it win. If not,
neither has an upper hand in commanding our assent. To assess the overall
plausibility of naturalism and any transcendent realism, one must look at all
their elements, and that is well beyond the scope of this book. (And whether
that is resolvable is itself an open question [see Jones 2009: chaps. 6 and
7].) Here the question must be limited to the plausibility of only one
element: their handling of the scientific study of mystical experiences.
    Is Naturalism or a Transcendent Alternative More Plausible?
So, does one side have better arguments than the other here? The
naturalists’ position is far from readily convincing. Even if one ignores the
problems with natural explanations raised earlier, one still must concede
that such explanations are at present questionable. Naturalists have to
assume some natural explanation is possible just to get to the question of
whether one of them permits the naturalists’ reduction. With our current
state of knowledge, nothing suggests that all mystical experiences are
obviously explainable by a few simple natural mechanisms. And whether
scientists could ever gather all the detailed neurological and physiological
data on the people whose experiences are to be explained to advance with
confidence a solid explanation is highly problematic. Transcendent realists
thus can argue that at present and for the foreseeable future it is only a
matter of metaphysical commitment to naturalism that makes the possibility
of any natural explanation seem plausible at all. Naturalists may also have
to accept the troubling prospect that no detailed explanations will ever be
forthcoming—the current situation may be the best we can expect.
     Naturalists can counter that transcendent explanations are examples of
metaphysics pure and simple and always will be. For example, even if God
uses the normal causal channels of nature to effect theistic mystical
experiences, still theists would have to explain how this is possible if any
particular theistic explanation is to be plausible. Naturalists will argue that,
even though natural explanations are currently incomplete, they at least are
better by default than the theists’ broad metaphysical attempts. Certainly,
the naturalists’ contention that the depth-mystical experience is nothing but
mental gears spinning without any mental content to engage is plausible:
the brain evolved to help us survive in the natural world, and if we succeed
in removing all sensory and other content from the mind while remaining
awake, the brain may well malfunction badly. At best, the state may be
simply awareness of consciousness and nothing more. But naturalists
contend that any view of consciousness as a searchlight independent of
content and independent of matter conflicts with our best knowledge of how
the brain works. To them, this is part of a cumulative case to accept that all
cognition is exclusively natural. Thus, naturalists may see the experiences
as self-induced delusions that seem so powerful to the experiencers that
they cannot help but consider them to be insights: if we stare and
concentrate hard enough and long enough with nothing but a mental image
of a purple gorilla dancing in the corner of the room where there is none,
our mind will eventually become stressed out enough that we will no doubt
see a purple gorilla dancing in the corner—and, according to naturalists, the
same may be happening when mystics meditate for years with some
mystical goal in mind.
      Advocates of mystical experiences as cognitive believe that mystical
experiences “feel so vividly real” and cognitive after mystics return to their
baseline state of consciousness—indeed, they feel even more in touch with
what is fundamentally real than experiences in ordinary consciousness—
that they must be rooted in a direct contact with a reality and thus are not
merely the subjective product of our brains (Strassman 2001; Newberg &
Lee 2005: 485). They do not have the feel of a dream or hallucination,
which is seen to be an illusion after the experiencer returns to a normal state
of consciousness; rather, the memory of mystical experiences has at a
minimum the same sense of reality as memories of ordinary “real” events
(Strassman 2001: 312–13; Newberg, d’Aquil, & Rause 2002: 112). To
advocates of mysticism, that scientists can in principle identify the neural
correlates no more explains away the insights than a neurological
explanation of perception explains away claims based on scientific
observations. In fact, neurophysiology arguably helps the mystics’ case by
showing that the experiences are grounded in unique configurations of the
neural bases of a healthy brain and are not the product of speculation or a
faulty brain. Meditative techniques may simply rewire the brain to permit
certain insights that are unrelated to the survival functions of the brain to
occur more easily.33
      This appears to be the end of the argument. For example, if our
ordinary consciousness has evolved for our survival, how can a state of
consciousness empty of all differentiable content possibly permit a
cognitive insight into reality? How can it be anything other than the result
of the brain malfunctioning, or at best a spandrel, i.e., a useless evolutionary
byproduct of some useful adaptation of the natural brain, that does not
produce knowledge? But on the other hand, how could it not be cognitive
when we have evolved a capacity for it? Indeed, even if it is a spandrel, this
in itself does not mean it cannot be cognitive of fundamental beingness.
Ordinary consciousness evolved for our survival and thriving, yet we are
able to learn at least something about the scientific workings of nature
underlying what we actually experience well enough to make successful
predictions even though this is not necessary for our survival. (Depending
on its nature, mathematics might also be included as a useful mental
product unconnected to our survival.) So too, our capacity to have mystical
experiences also arose as we evolved. So how, without the support of a
further philosophical argument, can we give ordinary consciousness priority
in determining all matters of what is ultimately real? Or consider evolution.
An evolutionary explanation for the existence of mystical experiences may
be that they lessen a fear that death is the end of our existence, thereby
increasing the willingness to sacrifice ourselves for our social group and
thus increasing the survivability of the group (Persinger 1985). Even if only
a small percentage of a group had mystical experiences, they could add
more possible options for action, and this flexibility may enhance
survivability (Murphy 2010: 505). Or certain types of meditation may have
directly affected the areas of the brain critical to attention and working
memory (Rossano 2007), even if they did not necessarily produce mystical
experiences. Thus, even if our capacity to have mystical experiences is an
adaptive feature, transcendent realists will argue that this is irrelevant to the
issue of mystical claims’ truth-value. They will also argue that such
explanations do not explain why we have the physiological capacity for
mystical experiences to begin with. The same is true for aspects of mystical
experiences other than the alleged insights. For example, does the bliss in
mystical experiences mean that mystics are connected to a fundamental
reality, or are mystics simply “blissed out” when the brain is not functioning
properly because of the lack of differentiated content? Any scientific
account of the brain events occurring during this sense of bliss will not help
resolve this question.
      More generally, how science could test the claim of an insight into
transcendent realities is not at all clear since transcendent realities cannot be
tested scientifically: such realities, if they exist, are not an object in the
universe and thus cannot be presented for examination by others or even by
oneself subjectively. It is certainly difficult to see how any possible
scientific studies of consciousness could establish a metaphysical claim like
Advaita’s that consciousness constitutes all of reality and is in fact the only
reality. Producing measurable physiological effects in Advaita meditators
does not confirm this claim—it is simply irrelevant to it. Nor is it clear how
such studies could more generally determine one of the competing
interpretations of the cognitive significance of the depth-mystical
experience as superior to its alternatives. Establishing that mystical
experiences are a distinct set of genuine neurological events does not settle,
or even bear on, which understanding of their status is correct. Nor can
research on the circuits of the brain that enable mystical experiences to
occur tell us anything even in principle about transcendent realities, if that
is indeed the cause, no matter how often research on the neural bases of
mystical experiences and spirituality is called “neurotheology” or research
on the neuropharmacology of psychotropic drugs is called
“pharmatheology”—the sciences tell us nothing theological. Andrew
Newberg envisions a broader neurotheology that is like a natural theology
(2010: 45–46, 221–47), but the important point here is that the
neuroscientific study of experiencers itself will not reveal anything
theological. Nor is such research “bridging the gap between mysticism and
science” or “uniting religion and science”—the two endeavors still involve
distinct types of questions (as discussed in chapter 8). Of course, scientists
may step out of their role as scientists and, qua philosophers, devise a
metaphysics based on Advaita nonduality or some other belief-system. But
nothing in the science itself requires any such interpretation: nothing in the
science can establish anything about the nature of any possible transcendent
reality or otherwise aid religious theorizing. Identifying objective
physiological changes is simply not the basis for affirming or denying any
transcendent claims.
      The issue comes down to whether natural explanations account for all
aspects of the experience or merely delineate the underlying physiological,
psychological, and social forces also at work in the experiencers, or whether
they can identify the sociocultural bases that experiencers employ as
conceptualizations to make sense of the experience, and these issues remain
unsettled by the natural explanations themselves. It is the philosophical
question of substantive reductionism, not a scientific issue.34 In the end,
advocates of mysticism will appeal to the principle of credulity discussed in
the last chapter until mystical experiences have actually been demonstrated
to be the result of the brain malfunctioning or a pathological state.
Naturalists will counter that naturalism is the best explanation, given
everything we know from science about how the world works. In addition,
naturalists see the mystics’ incompatible truth-claims as evidence that
mystical experiences do not convey any true knowledge at all: how could
mystical experiences be a source of any knowledge if conflicting claims
have persisted unresolved for millennia? To naturalists, this indicates that
obviously mystical doctrinal claims must come from other sources.