Problems of Justifying Specific Doctrinal Claims
One standard argument in favor of accepting the doctrinal claims specific to
one particular mystical tradition offers little help: the “argument from
religious experience” for God’s existence and his attributes. Theists take
mystical experiences as positive evidence, or even conclusive proof, that a
transcendent source exists and has certain features. Christians see any
argument for any transcendent source of the world as an argument for the
existence of a Christian version of God (e.g., Franks Davis 1989; Alston
1991; also see Gellman 1997, 2001). For example, Keith Yandell (1993)
presents an argument based on numinous experiences in favor of a creator
god but must dismiss depth-mystical experiences as empty of cognitive
value.10 The problem with such arguments is that their premises can never
be shown to be definitively better grounded in experience or by reasons
than their opponents’ counter-premises. All mystics appear to be in the
same epistemic position. Thus, even if the argument from religious
experience could counter natural reductions and establish that there is some
transcendent reality, the religious beliefs of the nature of that reality still
conflict—e.g., traditions denying a god have just as strong arguments for
the nonexistence of any god as the fundamental reality as those traditions
affirming a version of a personal creator God.11 Alleged refutations
asserting that these arguments cannot establish anything (e.g., Martin 1990;
Gale 1991) also present counterarguments that the religious believe they
can refute but that do not begin to convince the nonreligious.
      The basic problem is that we are simply not in a position to see if
mystical experiences are delusions or veridical or what is their proper
interpretation. Even having the experiences will not help when they can be
easily interpreted to fit various religious and naturalist systems. Moreover,
even if mystical experiences are taken as evidence for there being some
transcendent reality, there is a further problem: seeing mystical experience
as supporting the specific doctrines of any particular tradition requires
dismissing at least some accounts from mystics in other traditions and
arguing that those mystics really are experiencing something other than
what they think. Religious theorists are just as willing as naturalists to tell
mystics that they are mistaken about the content of their experiences. For
example, Caroline Franks Davis has to twist the Advaitins’ and Buddhists’
experiences to claim that mystical experiences really support a “broad
theism”—i.e., Shankara was really experiencing God although he explicitly
argued that the nonpersonal Brahman alone is real, and the Buddha was
totally unaware that he was experiencing a god.12 She ultimately claims that
all mystics, despite what they say, really experience “a loving
presence … with whom individuals can have a personal relationship”
(1989: 191)—just as one would expect someone raised a Christian to see
the true “common core” of the experience to be.13 But we cannot simply
translate one tradition’s highly ramified concepts depicting a transcendent
reality into another tradition’s equally highly ramified but different
concepts, nor can we simply assume that all low-ramified concepts about
the mystical experience support one chosen set of highly ramified
theological concepts over other interpretations and then conclude that all
mystical traditions really support one’s own tradition’s doctrines, although
the outsiders themselves do not know it. Such arguments rest squarely in
theological reasoning and are not based on mystical experiences
themselves.
      Nontheists also can just as easily apply the same contorted maneuvers
to the claims of Christian mystics to conclude that a transcendent source is
nonpersonal in nature or is only the mystic’s own transcendent self.
Christians may reject the evidential support of mystical experience for
nontheistic doctrines because the latter are “intertwined with bizarre and
fantastic elements” (Gellman 2001: 37), but non-Christians could do the
same with Christianity, starting with the core idea of a self-existent
transcendent creator who was incarnated through an immaculate conception
as a human being and yet who remained fully God while being fully human,
who died as a ransom for all human beings for the sins committed by the
original two human beings whom God created, and who then rose from the
dead and ascended into heaven. Overall, the vast majority of religious
believers will end up seeing even the depth-mystical experience as
objective support for the tradition they just happen to have been raised in.
Mystics may have to revise their understanding of the tradition’s doctrines
in light of the experiences, but they would still see these experiences as
confirming their beliefs. In such circumstances, the depth-mystical
experience remains neutral on the matter of which interpretation, if any, is
valid.
      Thus, religious theorists looking may easily end up arguing in circles
—starting with one tradition’s ideas, then interpreting the mystical writings
of the world to fit those ideas, and finally concluding that all mystical
experiences are objective confirmations of those ideas. But if mystical
experiences are open to what mystics in different traditions depict them as,
no one religious framework of highly ramified concepts and theories can be
imposed on the experiences’ actual content based only on considerations of
mystical experiences themselves. Even ignoring such contentious issues as
whether what is experienced in introvertive mystical experiences is personal
or nonpersonal in nature, what is experienced may not justify any
theological doctrinal elaborations. Certainly the traditional “omni’s” of a
theistic god—omnipotence, omniscience, omnibenevolence—cannot be
justified by any experience.14 The experiences may overwhelm mystics,
and what mystics encounter may seem to them to be the most powerful
reality that a human being could possibly experience. Thus, they might infer
that what is experienced has the maximum amount of whatever a particular
tradition values, but it hard to see how those qualities could be experienced.
How we could know from any experience that the reality is actually all-
powerful, all-knowing, and all-good? Or that it has infinite power,
knowledge, and goodness? It is too facile for Swinburne to claim that
believers who feel the presence of God or hear a voice or recognize God by
some “sixth sense” can know that God is an infinite or all-powerful being
(1991: 318–19)—that mystics enter an experience with a prior belief in an
omnipotent, omniscient, omnibenevolent reality does not give them any
special ability that other mystics lack to discern such a reality.15 Basic
theological problems such as whether a reality can have all three attributes
or how any loving god can be the ground of a world with so much natural
suffering are irrelevant to what mystics experience. In addition, the utter
simplicity of the depth-mystical experience presents problems for
theologians. It is not at all clear how a mystic could know from a mystical
experience that the reality experienced is a creator or designer or that the
designer must be the same as the ontic source of the world. Theologians
also have the problem that if what is experienced is timeless (i.e., existing
outside of the realm of time), how could it know temporal matters or act in
time at all? Mystics also have the sense that the transcendent reality is
immutable and thus cannot be affected by anything temporal such as the act
of prayer. Nonmystical theologians may prefer a god with more personality
and the ability to act in the world. So too, what mystics experience may
seem to be the source of our reality and make them feel secure in the world,
but how can they tell it is the source of all of the universe or does not have a
further source of its own being that was not experienced? Of course,
theologians may simply equate whatever mystics experience with their
theological version of a transcendent source and then jump quickly to
seeing all mystical experiences as support for their full theological
conceptions without seriously considering or perhaps even seeing other
possible options.
      And again, the diversity of religious doctrines presents a grave
problem even for those who reject naturalistic reductions of mystical
experiences. Of course, believers in each tradition will be confident that
they are right and any conflicting beliefs are wrong, and they will try to
show that their interpretation is superior to that of other traditions. But such
arguments will have to be based on grounds other than the mystical
experiences themselves. And even if there are theological arguments for
preferring one religious interpretation over others, the important point here
is that mystical experiences will not be evidence for one set of doctrines
over another. The experiences can be added to a “cumulative case” that
incorporates revelations, natural theology, and philosophical arguments for
a “best available explanation” argument for a particular religion’s doctrines.
But the same mystical experiences can be incorporated into a cumulative
case for any tradition. The experience is not self-interpreting but is
interpreted in light of the other elements of the case. In this way, the
experiences add no weight for one cumulative case against those of other
traditions since they give the same empirical weight to all. Thus, the
experiences themselves do not help determine the best available
explanation.