Ultimate Decisions
The positions arrived at in this chapter are these:

          •Mystical experiences cannot guarantee their own cognitivity, and
          we are not in a position to determine if introvertive mystics
          experience transcendent realities. (This will be discussed further
          in the next chapter.)
          •Even if mystics do experience transcendent realities, there are
          limitations on what mystics can claim to know about the nature of
          any transcendent realities.
          •Mystical experiences do not favor one tradition’s set of doctrines
          over another, and there are no theory-neutral ways of determining
          if one set is best.
          •It is currently rational for introvertive mystics in established
          traditions to accept their experiences as experiences of some
          transcendent reality.
          •Mystics are rational to accept their experiences as evidence for
          the doctrines that they hold, but this commitment is weakened by
          the presence of equally rational mystics holding competing
          doctrines. Nonmystics also can rationally treat mystical
          experiences as evidence of their doctrines, but with less
          confidence.

      The strength of mystical experiences may overwhelm experiencers,
and it may be impossible to convince a mystic that his or her understanding
is incorrect. But the philosophical questions are, What are these experiences
evidence of? What is the proper understanding of them? And is it
reasonable to believe in one’s own interpretation when one is aware that
other experiencers have conflicting interpretations? Any certainty about
mystical doctrines is misplaced: no account is impervious to the possibility
of error, no matter now certain a mystic may feel. Mystics cannot claim to
“just know” that they realized God or a nonpersonal reality. Any certainty
here is further damaged by the viability of plausible naturalist
interpretations of mystical experiences. (And it must be noted that it is not
merely those who have not had such experiences who deny any cognitive
value to these experiences: some who have had these experiences also deny
they produce any insights into reality. This points to the role of
postexperience judgments in our evaluation of them.) Even if there is one
transcendent reality and all introvertive mystics experience it, nevertheless
there are equally well grounded but conflicting views of its nature. The
different views are not revealing different aspects of that reality but
revealing both our limitations in knowing its nature and the presence of
cultural ideas in any mystical knowledge-claims. The conflict of claims
does not rule out that one may in fact be superior to all the others, but we
are not in a position to know which one that is. At best, introvertive
mystical experiences offer some evidence for the existence of something
transcendent. Still, mystical experiences should be treated as a matter of
cognitivity and not a matter of emotion alone unless they can be shown to
be cognitively empty. But we are not in a position to determine if mystical
experiences are veridical or are more insightful than ordinary experiences.
      Nevertheless, introvertive mystics at present can rationally treat their
experiences as some evidence of transcendent realities. But again,
naturalists will dispute these experiences as evidence, and the experiences
cannot be straightforward evidence of one tradition’s mystical doctrines of
the nature of what is experienced since some equally well grounded
doctrines in different traditions genuinely conflict. Thus, in light of the
diversity of plausible sets of mystical beliefs without any means of
resolution, no certainty in doctrines here is possible, no matter how
powerful and convincing an experience may appear to a mystic. From their
experiences, mystics may have no doubt that they experienced something,
but this certitude cannot carry over to the postexperience attempts at
understanding what was experienced. The diversity of doctrines in turn
leads to the very real question of whether mystical experiences are reliable
sources for generating beliefs. The rationality of accepting the specific
doctrines of a tradition is thus at least lessened. Ninian Smart summed up
the situation as a paradox: “On the one hand nothing seems more certain
than faith or more compelling than religious experience. On the other hand,
nothing seems less certain than any one particular system, for to any one
system there are so many vital and serious alternatives” (1985: 76).
      Are we then left with simply a pluralism of conflicting sets of
doctrines and with the basic dispute between naturalists and those
advocating a transcendent realism unresolved? Mystical experiences
themselves cannot help to resolve these disputes: no new information will
be forthcoming from future mystical experiences—they will merely be of
the same nature as those in the past. Even if all introvertive mystical
experiences involve experiencing the same transcendent reality, this does
not change the fact that after the experiences what was experienced is
always seen through some perspective, and we are not in a position to tell
which, if any, is best. Mystics typically see the reality in terms of their
tradition’s doctrines and reject the conflicting doctrines from other
traditions. Theistic exclusivists are not the only ones who reject the idea
that different doctrines are merely different responses to the same reality.
But mystics also routinely accept that there is more to a transcendent reality
than is humanly experiencable or knowable, and so today some may also be
willing to hold their beliefs tentatively and accept that mystical experiences
are not “self-evident” or “self-validating.” They may accept that they see
mystical experiences in terms of their own tradition’s doctrines but realize
that this is but one option and that at least some other ways of seeing them
are equally justified. So too, new religious options may arise in the future.
      The only way to assure that one is avoiding error is to remain agnostic.
But it is difficult to remain agnostic on the issue of the nature of what one
experienced when it seems so overwhelming and so important. Nonmystics
also often attach great significance to mystics’ alleged insights in justifying
their faith. In a “religiously ambiguous” universe, we are forced to choose.
William James, for one, thought that we are epistemically entitled to make a
decision on issues of human existence that are “forced, live, and
momentous” when the evidence is inconclusive and the neutralism of
agnosticism is difficult to maintain.33 And even if there is epistemic parity
between disputants, it is indeed hard to suspend judgment.
       In addition, no fundamental choice among competing basic belief-
systems can ever be fully justified on rational grounds, since there is no
further mutually agreed-on level of beliefs or values for competitors to
appeal to. Here we reach the level of our deepest bedrock beliefs—the
conflict will come down to our intuitions and judgments about what the
fundamental nature of reality is, what we consider ultimately valuable, and
what types of experiences we accept as cognitive.34 The religious and
nonreligious are in the same boat when it comes to the ultimate
groundlessness of all belief. As Ludwig Wittgenstein said: “If I have
exhausted the justifications, I have reached bedrock and my spade is turned.
Then I am inclined to say ‘This is simply what I do’ ” (Philosophical
Investigations, para. 217). All we can ultimately do is show what we are
committed to by how we live. With all evidence and agreed-on standards of
reasoning exhausted, we have a conflict of starting points for any argument
or justification; it becomes a matter of worldviews and metaphysics, and
philosophy will not be able to resolve the dispute.35 This is not to say that
one’s final decision cannot be well-informed and carefully considered,
including examining possible alternatives and criticisms and advancing
defenses that opponents accept as reasons (even if they are not convinced
by them), but ultimately we do have to make a choice that we cannot further
justify. Such a choice may be deemed nonrational, but it is not irrational
(i.e., contrary to reason).
       In such circumstances, it is hard to conclude that introvertive mystics
themselves are irrational today in holding their extraordinary experiences as
evidence of some transcendent reality and also of their own tradition’s
mystical beliefs, even if they accept that they may be wrong about
transcendent realism and that other mystics are equally reasonable and well-
grounded and that the full nature of the reality experienced in introvertive
experiences is a mystery. Thus, mystics may rationally continue to hold the
beliefs of their tradition and continue to practice their tradition’s way of life,
but they must realize that they may be wrong and that they are not in an
epistemologically superior position to other mystics and nonmystics, and
thus they must accept their beliefs only tentatively. Combining such
tentativeness with a full religious commitment may not be easy.
                                       4

            The Scientific Study of Mystics and Meditators