Mystical Experiences
A “religious experience” can be broadly classified as any experience
imbued with such a strong sense of reality and meaning that it causes the
experiencers to believe that they have been in contact with the source of the
entire natural realm or some other irreducibly fundamental reality. That is,
these experiences are taken to be a direct awareness of another component
to reality: either the “beingness” of the natural realm or a transcendent
reality. (A “transcendent reality” is a nonspatial and nontemporal reality
that is not part of the realm of reality that is open to scientific study, such as
a self or soul existing independent of the body or a creator god or a
nonpersonal source, or, if that reality is immanent to the natural realm, one
that is not experiencable as an object—hence, not a “phenomenon”—and so
is not open to scientific scrutiny.) Either way, the reality is allegedly
experiencable, and mystical experiences allegedly involve an insight into
the nature of reality that people whose awareness is confined to the natural
order of objects have not had. There are many types of experiences properly
classified as religious—e.g., prayers, alleged revelations, visions and
auditions, conversion experiences, and those “altered states of
consciousness” (i.e., states of awareness differing in nature from our
normal, baseline waking state) that the experiencers take as having religious
significance. Indeed, seeing all of the universe as the creation of God,
enjoying sacred music, or even writing theology can be called a “religious
experience.”
      Thus, there is not merely one abstract “religious experience.” Of
particular importance here are allegedly preconceptual, theistic experiences
of an overpowering and mysterious otherness—a noetic sense of “absolute
dependence” on a reality beyond nature that is greater than oneself
(Schleiermacher 1999) or the nonrational sui generis sense of something
mysterious, dreadfully powerful, and fascinating that is “wholly other”
(Otto 1958). Some Christians take this to be the source of all religion.
Theists may well have experiences of transcendent otherness where the
sense of self that is separate from that reality remains intact—a sense of
encountering the presence of sacred “Something Other” with which a
person can commune (Hardy 1979: 131). But there are also nontheistic
religious experiences and other types of theistic experiences. Following
Rudolph Otto (1958), scholars in the past distinguished such “numinous”
experiences of the “holy” from mystical experiences: the latter do not
involve a subject/object duality as with a sense of otherness or presence,
while numinous experiences involve a sense of seeing or hearing some
reality distinct from the experiencer, as with visions.8
      Many scholars include visionary experiences among mystical ones
(e.g., Hollenback 1996). However, a narrow definition of “mysticism” is
used here: it is emptying the mind of conceptualizations, dispositions,
emotions, and other differentiated content that distinguishes what is
considered here as “mystical.” The resulting experiences are universally
considered mystical. Thus, visions and auditions and any other experience
of something distinct from the experiencer are excluded.9 In addition, many
persons who are deemed here to be mystics (e.g., John of the Cross) point
out the dangers of accepting visions and voices as cognitive. Visions are
often considered to be merely the manifestations of various subconscious
forces that fill the mind when it is being emptied of “dualistic” content or
when a mystic is returning to the baseline state of mind. In Zen, visions,
sounds, and sensations occurring during meditation are dismissed as
hallucinatory “demon states” (makyo). Mystical experiences are also
associated with paranormal phenomena, but paranormal powers are also
objected to as a distraction (e.g., Yoga Sutras 3.36f). But mystics may also
have revelations, visions, or other religious experiences or alleged
paranormal abilities—indeed, in emptying the mind of other content,
meditation may open the mind up to these and to “demonic” phenomena.
Mystics may also interact with others within their tradition who have had
visions when developing doctrines.
      Calling mystical experiences “trances” mischaracterizes them, since
mystics remain fully aware. Calling them “ecstasy” is misleading, since the
experiencer is not always incapable of action or coherent thought. In
addition, there is no hard and fast line between extrovertive mystical
experiences and other spiritual experiences or even ordinary sense-
experience since some mystical experiences involve only a slight loosening
of our mind’s normal conceptual control, although they do involve an
altered state of consciousness. So, too, both extrovertive and theistic
introvertive theistic mystical experiences share with numinous experiences
a sense of reality, although numinous experiences have the additional
element of a sense of a subject/object differentiation and may also involve
receiving a message or vision. Nor is a mystical experience a vague sense
or feeling that there is more to reality than the natural universe. So too, one
can transcend a sense of self without mysticism (e.g., becoming a dedicated
member of a social movement). And nonmystical experiences can have
lasting effects and can transform a person.
      At the center of mysticism as stipulated here is an inner quest to still
the conceptual and emotional apparatuses of the mind and the sense of self
in order to sense reality without mediation (as discussed in the next chapter,
constructivists disagree). Mental dispositions and emotions and their roots
must all be eradicated. The quest begins with substituting a desire for
enlightenment for more mundane desires, but even this desire must be
overcome for the mind to become clear of all conceptual, dispositional, and
emotional content. But there is not one “mystical experience.” Rather, there
are two classes of mystical experiences: the extrovertive (which include
mindfulness states of consciousness, “nature mysticism,” and “cosmic
consciousness”) and the introvertive (which include differentiated
nontheistic and theistic mystical experiences and the empty “depth-mystical
experience”). Extrovertive and introvertive mystics share terms such as
“oneness,” “being,” and “real,” but their subjects are not the same:
extrovertive mysticism is about the “surface” world of phenomena while
introvertive mysticism is about the underlying “depth” sources.10 Thus, all
mystical experiences should not be placed on one continuum. Introvertive
experiences may lead to metaphysical arguments that extend to the
phenomenal world, but this does not mean that the introvertive and
extrovertive experiences themselves can be conflated.
     In extrovertive experiences, the mind retains sensory content; in
introvertive experiences, consciousness is void of all sense-experiences but
may retain other differentiable mental content. The distinction goes back to
Rudolf Otto (1932: 57–72), and the labels “extrovertive” versus
“introvertive” were set by Walter Stace. The distinction appears to be
supported empirically by differences in their physiological effects (see
Hood 2001: 32–47; Dunn, Hartigan, & Mikulas 1999). For Stace, there is a
unifying vision of “all is one” with the One perceived extrovertively versus
the One apprehended introvertively as an inner subjectivity in all things
(1960a: 62–135). Regardless of his theory, an awareness of a fundamental
component of reality is allegedly given in both classes of mystical
experiences. In either class, mystical experiences can occur spontaneously
without any cultivation or meditative preparation. The impact of such
isolated experiences may transform the experiencer or may be taken only as
interesting ends in themselves. But classical mysticism was never about
isolated mystical experiences, including “enlightenment experiences.”
     The accounts of what is experienced in mystical experiences are
shaped by the cultural categories of each mystic. But it may be possible to
get behind these accounts to come up with a phenomenology of mystical
experiences—i.e., to get to the “givenness” of an experience itself by
depicting the experiential characteristics presented to the subject while
bracketing the questions of what is being experienced and whether the
experience is veridical. And there are some characteristics that all mystical
experiences of both tracks share in one degree or another: the weakening or
total elimination of the usual sense of an “ego” separate from other realities,
while the true transcendent “self” seems deathless; a sense of timelessness;
a focusing of consciousness; a sense that both the experience and what is
experienced are ineffable (i.e., cannot be adequately expressed in any words
or symbols); feelings of bliss or peace; often there are positive emotions
(including empathy) and an absence of negative ones (anger, hatred, and so
on); and a cognitive quality, i.e., a sense that one has directly touched some
ultimate reality and attained an insight into the fundamental nature of
oneself or of all reality, with an accompanying sense of certainty and
objectivity (Hood 2002, 2005). To William James, mystical experience
without the “over-beliefs” concerning any reality that might be involved
have these four features: ineffability, a noetic quality, transiency, and
passivity (1958: 380–82). Walter Stace’s description has been especially
influential in psychology: a sense of objectivity or reality; a feeling of
blessedness, joy, and so on; a feeling of holiness; paradoxicality; and (with
reservations) ineffability (1960a: 79).11 A phenomenology of each type of
mystical experience might help in giving an empirical basis for a
knowledge-claim, but the phenomenal features alone are limited in
providing what can be inferred about what is experienced and so are limited
in adjudicating competing mystical knowledge-claims (as discussed in
chapter 3).
      Both experiences are passive, or better receptive. One may do things to
cultivate such experiences, but in the end one cannot force the change in
consciousness involved. Meditators cannot force the mind to become still
by following any technique or series of steps. Indeed, as Teresa of Avila
said, “the harder you try not to think of anything, the more aroused your
mind becomes and you will think even more” (Interior Castle 4.3). In
Buddhism, nirvana is considered “unconstructed” (asamskrita) since it is
not the product of any action or the accumulation of merit. To nontheists,
external help is not needed, but to theists enlightenment is a matter of grace
(e.g., Katha Up. 2.20, Mundaka Up. 3.2.3, and Shvetashvatara Up. 1.6). To
Teresa of Avila, “God gives when he will, as he will, and to whom he
will.”12 Mystical training techniques and studying doctrines can lessen a
sense of self, remove mental obstacles, and calm a distracted mind; thus,
they facilitate mystical experiences. But they cannot guarantee the complete
end to a sense of self—as long as we are trying to “get enlightened,” we are
still in an acquisitive state of mind and cannot succeed in becoming selfless.
No act of self-will or any preparatory activity (including the natural triggers
discussed in chapter 4) can force mystical experiences to occur: we must
surrender, simply let go. In short, no actions can make us selfless. But once
meditators stop trying to force the mind to change and become receptive,
the mind calms itself and the mystical experiences occur automatically. To
mystics, it seems that they are being acted upon: in introvertive mystical
experiences, the transcendent ground that is already present within us
appears while the meditator is passive; in extrovertive experiences, natural
phenomena shine forth unmediated by interference from our discursive
mind.