Problems with Sociocultural Explanations
Naturalists, in sum, deny the possibility of mystical experiences being a
potential source of knowledge of any transcendent reality. If naturalists are
correct, then even if transcendent realities exist, introvertive mystical
experiences are still nothing but natural events. Even if mysticism
contributes to mental well-being, that is no reason to believe that
transcendent realities are involved. That is, if mysticism is explained
exclusively in natural terms, e.g., as enhancing social solidarity or
compensating for the lack of social power, the alleged cognitive value of
these experiences that are used as epistemic grounds for mystical ways of
life is undercut. Indeed, it becomes difficult in such circumstances to treat
any commitment to a way of life based on mystical experiences as even
minimally rational. But before adopting this conclusion, certain problems
with the naturalists’ reductions should be addressed.
      One such problem is often overlooked: there is no one generic or
abstract “natural explanation,” but numerous competing candidates. One
cannot dismiss the issue of which one is correct with a wave of the hand,
exclaiming “Well, one must be right!” without revealing the metaphysical
nature of one’s commitment to naturalism. Instead, one must determine if
any of the various physiological, psychological, social, and philosophical
explanations is plausible at this time.19
      It is easy to see why social theorists may be inclined to discount
mysticism. From a psychological point of view, certainly anyone who
would want to overcome a sense of self could only be classified as
“pathological.” So too, major differences in values might put mystics out of
step with a society at large. Crises or imbalances may have impelled
mystics to choose their path. But psychosocial causes and functions are in
themselves irrelevant to the possibility of genuine mystical experiences and
the possible truth or falsity of mystical claims. The same arguments could
be applied to science. For example, the scientific interest in the repeatable
and the predicable may reveal a neurotic fear of the unique, the unknown,
the erratic, and the unexpected, as Abraham Maslow argued (1966: 20–32).
Few would consider this sufficient grounds to dismiss all of science. Or
consider Sir Isaac Newton: he was not a paradigm of psychological health
—he was vain, ambitious, humorless, and extremely competitive—but
some of these very traits may have been instrumental in him becoming
arguably the greatest scientist of all time. Equating “true” with “arising
from psychosocial healthy conditions” would be unwarranted for scientific
or mystical claims. So too, finding the evolutionary or genetic basis
enabling human beings to conduct science (see Shepard 1997) is not
grounds to reject science.
      Social theories exhibit another problem: broadness and looseness.
There is never anything comparable to the tight predictions in natural
science—theorists can correlate social groups with the inclination to have
mystical experiences, but they cannot predict exactly what percentage of a
given group or which specific individuals will have such experiences.
Theorists may note that religious experiences come disproportionately to
members of certain social groups—e.g., older, college-educated, wealthier,
black, Protestant males in America (Greeley 1975), or perhaps from
socially oppressed and disenfranchised groups (Lewis 1989), or introvertive
mystical experiences may be more frequent among females (Hood 1997),
with extrovertive experiences of feeling at one with the universe more
common among men and atheists (Kokoszka 1999/2000). But the theories’
predictive element is always a matter of very broad percentages—the
theories can always handle any specific experiences occurring inside or
outside the groups with the highest occurrences.
      Such theories do qualify as explanations since they help our
understanding even if there are no exact predictions. But the sociocultural
theories will at best only explain why certain persons are prone to having
them, not explain why or how mystical experiences appear. This may
explain all that sociocultural naturalists want to know, but this has no
bearing on whether mystical experiences may really involve transcendent
realities. Nor do the social origins of religious beliefs and practices in
general explain why we have a physiology with a capacity for mystical
experiences to occur in the first place. Nor do evolutionary theories of
religion. So too, whether religious beliefs have a positive or negative value
for a group’s survival or for an individual’s well-being does not bear on the
question of whether a transcendent reality exists or not: as long as the
mystics simply believe that they have experienced transcendent realities,
the consequences would be the same whether such realities exist or not.20
Merely noting factors in our psychological or social makeup that may be
responsible for why certain people or members of certain groups are more
likely to have mystical experiences does not impress many people as the
final explanation of the experiences. Nor does it affect the question of their
possible cognitivity any more than the fact that some social groups may be
more likely to produce scientists or that people with certain psychological
dispositions are more likely to become scientists undercuts the validity of
science.
     In addition, as noted in chapter 2, culture may explain why Christian
visions are of Mary and not Krishna, but it does not explain why there is
some “sense of presence” to experience in the visions in the first place
(Bowker 1973: 42–43). Thus, culture does not explain all of the experience,
including what may be its most significant part. If so, the cognitive content
of religious experiences is not reduced to the cultural framework, and new
knowledge is possible. Conceptualizations from our everyday life will
always be needed for our mind to feel it has comprehended what has
happened in a mystical experience, and to achieve this the religious may use
their social or parent-child relationships or some other sociocultural
phenomenon as models for transcendent realities. Thus, the religious
symbols and theories that experiencers construct may well reflect the
culture in which they were raised. These conceptualizations thus will
always have some psychological or social basis, and there is no reason
social scientists will not be able to identify and explain them. This,
however, does not mean that that is all there is to mystical experiences.
Even if the models are an active component of the experience itself, as
constructivists claim, this cannot rule out a transcendent reality as an
additional cause. Similarly, mystics may agree that many of our traditional
conceptions of a transcendent reality are merely projections of our egos or
social groups, but they would deny that such projections alter the
transcendent reality experienced in mystical experiences.
     Thus, social scientists may be studying only how sociocultural factors
shape a mystical experience and the disposition of some people to have
these experiences, not everything about the experiences themselves.
Sociocultural reductionists believe that their explanations render
transcendent explanations redundant and thus dismissible as superfluous.
Sociocultural explanations can be deemed sufficient for explaining
mysticism only if we have already accepted that mystical doctrines are
false. But these natural explanations may at most explain only the “form”
that mystical experiences take or who is likely to have one, but not the
“content.” We must still ask whether a mystical experience involves a
transcendent reality or not.21
              Problems with Physiological Explanations
Even in neuroscience today, with our present state of knowledge of the
brain, there is an absence of any complete, detailed explanation of the
occurrence of mystical experiences. In fact, scientists have not established
exact correlations of brain states with everyday states such as emotions.
      Talk of a genetic basis to mystical experiences—a “God gene”—as an
explanation may also be risky. Apparently even simple human traits involve
hundreds of different genes (Beauregard & O’Leary 2007: 47–55). Perhaps
there is no single “God gene complex” either. Or consider V. S.
Ramachandran’s identification of epileptic microseizures in the left
temporal lobe as the neurological basis of mystical experiences reveals
another problem: not everyone who has this type of epileptic seizure has
religious experiences (1998: 186)—most in fact only have epileptic
seizures. Few even have visions (Kelly & Grosso 1997: 532; Horgan 2003:
99). Any explanation of mystical experiences in terms of epileptic activity
in the temporal lobe would have to explain why only a few people have
these experiences and so many do not, and why the mystical experiences
are positive in tone while the seizure state is not. Seizures may be only
another way that the mind becomes open to mystical experiences.
Something in an individual’s personality or background may be a factor in
whether that person with this type of epilepsy has a religious experience.
Moreover, this type of epilepsy involves areas of the brain associated with
speech; at most, it is associated with triggering numinous visions and
voices, not the silent, inner experiences of mysticism. One clinical study
found that while most patients in the study had some subjective experience
during their seizures, none of their descriptions met the criteria of a
“mystical experience” (Greyson et al. 2014).22 One the other hand, the
meditating Buddhist monks and Franciscan nuns studied by Eugene
d’Aquili and Andrew Newberg exhibited no signs of this or any other
pathology, and one cannot simply assume that they must have had this type
of epilepsy because that is what causes these experiences without arguing in
a very tight circle. The same issue applies to all identifications of the brain
mechanisms of mystical experiences: scientists must actually study a large
number of experiencers of each type of mystical experience before drawing
any conclusions and not simply uncritically generalize from only a few
examples.
     So too, mystical and numinous experiences may not be associated with
only one spot in the brain (Beauregard & O’Leary 2007: 255–88). LSD
affects virtually all areas of the brain (Goodman 2002), and mystical
experiences may do the same. The “corroborative evidence to support a link
between the temporal lobe and mystical experience has been rather sparse”
and “a much more complex picture of mystical experience involving
extensive neocortical involvement” may be needed; neuroimaging studies
of people undergoing mystical experiences show “complex patterns of
widespread activation in the cortices, midbrain, and brainstem” (Greyson et
al. 2014: 11, 12). Thus, mystical experiences may not be associated with
one region of the brain or one simple pattern of brain activity.
Ramachandran realizes that scientists are still a long way from showing that
there is a “God module” in the brain that might be genetically specified—
scientists are currently in a “twilight zone” of neurology (1998: 188). Thus,
any simple explanations in terms of, for example, temporal lobe activity
may not elucidate the neurological base of all types of mystical experiences
in both of its classes. Arguably, it should be easier to find biological bases
for the depth-mystical experience than for numinous experiences such as
revelations, since the latter experiences seem to be more complex events
involving sensory-like activity (visions, voices, tactile sensations, or a
combination of these), memory, emotions, and motor activity. Depth-
mystical experiences seem simpler in this regard, but even they may be
complex. The extrovertive state of mindfulness combines mental calming
with sense-experience and internal mental operations. Introvertive mystical
experiences may also involve different parts of the brain. If so, they too
would have no simple neurological explanation of any mystical experience.
And considering the different physiological effects that the same type of
meditation often produces, the picture may be a good deal more complex
than could be handled by any simple explanation.
     In sum, there are many different types of extrovertive and introvertive
mystical experiences, and there is no reason to believe the physiological
base is the same in every case. For example, research shows that EEG
indices differ in mindfulness meditation from those in the concentrative
meditation connected to the depth-mystical experience. Consistent
differences in neurological readings between different types of extrovertive
and introvertive mystical experiences strongly suggest a difference in the
states of consciousness involved (but this does not prove this, due to the
multiple-realization problem and its inverse discussed below).
      There also are other problems. First, if electrical stimulation or a drug
could produce a given mystical experience 100 percent of the time,
naturalists may be confident that there is a natural reduction—no “grace of
God” would be needed. But that has not occurred: no triggers approach that
figure—only significantly lower percentages are ever attained, and the
exact experience apparently depends on the setting and the experiencer’s
beliefs. This leaves room for grace or some other explanation of why some
participants have these experiences and others in the same setting do not.
Thus, this affects the issue of whether natural factors cause mystical
experiences and whether the experiences can be explained away or are
cognitive.
      Second, note again the gap between brain conditions and
consciousness. Mystical experiences no doubt share this gap with other
conscious phenomena. Again, this means that scientists do not study
mystical experiences at all when they study the biological correlates of an
experience (see also Jones 1986: 219–22). In addition, apparently different
states of the mind can have the same biological bases. Consider Herbert
Benson’s finding that there is a great variety of “subjective” (i.e.,
experiential) responses—including no change of consciousness at all—
accompanying the same physiological changes produced by his simple
relaxation technique (1975: 115). Different states of mind apparently share
the same bases in the brain. According to Stanislav Grof, no subjective
phenomena are an invariant product of the chemical action of LSD (Smith
2000: 81). The placebo effect also holds for some psychotropic drugs: once
we learn a response, we can be given what we think is the drug (when in
fact it is a placebo) and the response will occur; conversely, we can
unknowingly ingest the active ingredient and no change in consciousness
occurs. In short, the same state of consciousness may occur with different
biochemical bases and vice versa. Thus, the “multiple realization” problem
from the mind-body field (see Jones 2013: 38–39, 76–78) and its inverse
are both possibilities in the case of mystical experiences. This does not rule
out finding more exact neurological bases of these experiences in the future,
but without a one-to-one explanation, a natural reduction is not possible: all
mystical experiences will, of course, be grounded in some bodily state, but
simply identifying those states will not explain why the same state can be
realized in more than one biological state or vice versa. Thus, the
explanation of the experiential level would still be missing, as would an
explanation of why reality permits the higher-level events to occur at all.
      At this time, that a complete biological explanation of a mystical
experience is even possible is a speculative assumption. Each scientist’s
proposed explanation of mystical experiences is disputed by a majority of
other scientists. Some scientists question the empirical findings of other
scientists. (One recurring problem in these studies is to make sure that
scientists are actually measuring activity connected to mystical experiences
and not merely to any intense experiences producing emotional effects.)
Some investigators express skepticism over whether technology is able to
produce a genuine mystical experience or activate all the subjective aspects
of such experiences. For example, Michael Persinger’s “God helmet”
generates a weak magnetic field that triggers a small burst of electrical
activity in the temporal lobes; this causes about 40 percent of his subjects to
experience a sensed presence of a vague separate spectral entity; this entity
is interpreted by the religious (but not by others) as a religious figure
(1987). Critics have had difficulty duplicating Persinger’s results and
suggest that the “sense of presence” is due only to suggestibility (Granqvist
et al. 2005). This might support attribution theory: the neuroscientist Mario
Beauregard dismisses such numinous experiences as merely the products of
suggestibility and not genuine religious experiences at all (2007: 96–99).23
But apparently no one stimulated by the God helmet has publically reported
anything resembling the phenomenology of a mystical experience—bliss,
sense of unity, and ineffability (Horgan 2003: 98–99). Edward Kelly and
Michael Grosso also question the entire focus on temporal lobe epilepsy,
since even “garden-variety levels of euphoria” are rare in such epileptic
episodes, not anything truly mystical, and such euphoria lasts only a few
seconds out of a total epileptic episode; moreover, the emotions more
typically shown are fear, terror, anxiety, apprehension, and anger (1997:
531–34). They also slam the work of Eugene d’Aquili and Andrew
Newberg as bad science unpublished in peer-reviewed publications and
their “model” as “little more than a neurological fairy tale” (ibid.: 537–38).
Richard Sloan also thinks that Newberg and d’Aquili’s studies (1999, 2002)
speculate too broadly based on two small SPECT studies with a total of
eleven subjects and no control group (2006: 247).24 Indeed, some critics
today dismiss the entire enterprise of trying to locate a locus in the brain of
any behavior or complex mental event as “the new phrenology.”
     Nothing today except a metaphysical commitment to naturalism can
rule out the possibility of a transcendent reality as part of the causal chain
of introvertive mystical experiences. Of course, someday a complete and
detailed explanation in natural terms may be worked out and agreed on by
most scientists. But at present, naturalists’ reductions are based on no more
than an assumption. They are in the same position as reductive naturalists
on the mind: the explanations are complete only in the sense that their
metaphysics dictates the possibility of such an explanation. We are left at
present with only an “in principle” reductionism, and this is simply a
restatement of the reductionists’ metaphysical beliefs.
     One other problem is often overlooked: all experiences have biological
explanations, and no type of experience can be rejected as a possible
vehicle for insights because of that. No one argues that sense-experiences
are illusions because they have a neural base. EEG examinations of
scientists doing research are irrelevant to the possible veridicality of their
observations or the truth or falsity of their theories: the readings would be
the same in the case of correct or incorrect observations and for insights or
mistakes.25 And the same holds for meditators. As William James said,
“Scientific theories are organically conditioned as much as religious
emotions are; and if we only knew the facts intimately enough, we should
doubtless see ‘the liver’ determining the dicta of the sturdy atheist as
decisively as it does those of the Methodist under conviction anxious about
his soul” (1958: 29–30). The truth or falsity of a claim is simply
independent of such accounts and turns on other considerations.
     Finally, another fundamental problem touched on above concerning
experiences in general applies here: merely establishing correlations of a
mystical experience and neural events does not prove that the neural events
cause the experience or vice versa. So too, changes in a state of
consciousness may correlate one-to-one with changes in brain states, but
this does not mean that the latter cause the former. Correlating does not
explain anything—only metaphysics leads naturalists to conclude that
biological changes must be the cause of the experience. Based on
correlations alone, whether bodily events cause experiences or vice versa
and whether experiences are reducible to only bodily events or accompany
physiological events remain open issues. In short, reductions cannot
proceed by merely establishing correlations.