Constructivism
Critics of mystical knowledge-claims point out that mystical experiences in
different religious traditions are always taken as confirming the basic
doctrines of the tradition that the experiencer was trained in. Buddhist
monks and Franciscan nuns in one empirical study exhibited similar
physiological changes, but the Buddhist monks described their experiences
in terms of selflessness while the Christian nuns described theirs as “a
tangible sense of the closeness of God and a mingling with Him” (Newberg,
d’Aquili, & Rause 2002: 7), just as their traditions dictate.11 This suggests
that the experiencer’s cultural beliefs control their claims.12
      This contention leads to “constructivism” in philosophy in response to
Walter Stace’s “universal core” thesis that mystical experiences everywhere
share some elements (see Katz 1978, 1983, 1992a, 2000; Gill 1984; also see
Jones 1909). Constructivists prefer the name “contextualists,” but as noted
below nonconstructivists can also emphasize the need to examine mystics
in their cultural context to understand their knowledge-claims—it is the
construction of all experiences by cultural concepts that nonconstructivists
deny. Thus, “constructivism” is a better title. As the founder of
constructivism, Steven Katz, bluntly puts it: “let me state the single
epistemological assumption that has exercised my thinking and which has
forced me to undertake the present investigation: There are NO pure (i.e.,
unmediated) experiences” (1978: 26). There can be no experience without
the mediation of conceptualization (also see Proudfoot 1985: chap. 4;
Bagger 1999: chap. 4). (Actually, Stace agreed with this: he too claimed
that “there is no such thing as an absolutely pure experience without any
interpretation at all” [1960a: 203]. But he believed that experience and
conceptualizations can be separated [ibid.: 31–32, 71–76].13)
      Constructivists need not deny that mystical experiences are genuine
neurological events, nor need they accept attribution theory.14 The key idea
for strong constructivists is that the alleged cognitive content of all mystical
experiences is totally controlled by the experiencer’s prior religious beliefs.
The experiences can have a huge emotional impact on the experiencer, and
he or she may take them to be cognitive, but doctrines from the
experiencer’s cultural background must be read in, precisely because the
experience itself is void of any of its own cognitive content. That is, even if
there is some amorphous reality that is experienced, that element too must
be structured before it reaches awareness; thus, that element does not
determine or even figure in the alleged cognitive content of the experience
—only learned cultural beliefs do. (Katz and other strong constructionists
do not claim that learned cultural constructs cause mystical experiences or
explain why some people are mystics and other are not.) Thus, there is no
“core” to the experience that is not penetrated by conceptual structuring. No
part of even a depth-mystical experience is unstructured—i.e., untouched
by language or concept. (Mediation must permeate the entire experience;
otherwise, there would be a cultureless core to the experience that would
give nonconstructivists an opening.) This means that a mystical experience
can make no cognitive contribution to the belief-framework. No valid
propositions can be generated on the basis of mystical experiences, and thus
mystical experiences “logically cannot be the grounds for any final
assertions about the nature or truth of any religious or philosophical
position”—“mystical or more generally religious experience is irrelevant in
establishing the truth or falsity of religion in general or any specific religion
in particular” (Katz 1978: 22). In sum, nothing cognitively significant
would remain if the doctrinal and cultural contents were removed from
these experiences. So too, any changes in a mystic’s beliefs must come
from nonexperiential cultural beliefs, not from any new mystical
experiences.
      The basis of this position is the view held virtually universally in
philosophy today that all our experiences are conceptually structured.
Constructivists contend that all conscious experiences, including mystical
ones, must have an intentional object. There can be no “pure
consciousness” event: there are no experiences when there is no
phenomenal content in the mind—the “light” of awareness is turned “on”
only when there are objects to illuminate. Following Franz Brentano, all
consciousness is consciousness of something. Even emotional moods have
some vague object. “Contentless consciousness” is an oxymoron: we can
only be conscious if there is something there to be conscious of. There can
be no content-free experience of “beingness.” Nor can our mind reflect
reality “as it really is”—the mind only approaches reality through our own
mental conceptual filters. That is, the concepts we create become part of a
filter by which the mind processes information in every experience—
nothing enters our awareness directly and unfiltered. There is no experience
free of any structuring framework originating from an experiencer. In short,
all experience is “theory-laden.” Sensory input is structured into
perceptions of sense-objects by the concepts developed within the
perceiver’s culture of what types of objects make up the world. And the
same structuring process applies to all extrovertive and introvertive
mystical experiences. Thus, as Wilfrid Sellars said, “all awareness … is a
linguistic affair” (1963: 160).
      The roots of the claim lie in Immanuel Kant’s view on sense-
perception: “intuitions without concepts are blind.” He too denied that there
could be a “bare consciousness” devoid of content. Sense-perception is an
active process of selecting and relating what is experienced to our concepts
and beliefs rather than a passive registering of an external reality. Ludwig
Wittgenstein expanded the different perceptions of Gestalt figures to all
perception as “seeing as” (see Hick 1989: 140–42): all sense-perception is
structured. For Kant, all people have certain a priori categories (such as
time, space, substance, and causation) that structure the noumena that affect
our sense organs into perceived phenomena, but the noumena lie forever
outside of our knowledge: no unmediated, direct experience of the noumena
is possible, and so no knowledge of a noumenon is possible.
      Constructivists go beyond Kant: they focus on a layer of structuring
beyond the a priori categories to a posteriori ones—our learned cultural
beliefs and concepts. To them, all experiences have embedded
conceptualizations specific to particular cultures. For this reason, strong
constructivists argue that mystical experiences are not the same across
cultures: each mystic’s experiences are conditioned by different elements,
and so they are phenomenologically different from others’. There is no one
universal depth-mystical experience or universal core to all mystical
experiences: all mystical experiences have some phenomenal content, and
each experience is unique to each experiencer.15 The context of each
individual mystic determines all of his or her experiences. Thus, there can
be no comparisons of experiences from different cultures and eras, even if
cultures are uniform in each era. This means that there can be no foundation
for any typology of mystical experiences or phenomenology of mysticism
(Katz 1978: 56). (However, Katz cannot help but make distinctions between
types of mystical experiences—e.g., between “absorptive” and “non-
absorptive” experiences [ibid.: 41].)
      Moderate constructivists (e.g., John Hick) insist that the external world
still plays a role in constraining our creations—concepts structure all
experiences, but reality surprises us and resists our expectations, and thus
how we conceptualize an experience is not infinitely malleable. Culture
might explain why religious visions are of Mary or Krishna, but it does not
explain all of the experience—i.e., why some “sense of presence” is there to
interpret in the first place. Nor does culture explain all of the content of
mystical experiences: some content independent of the form is still part of
the content of the experience. For moderate constructivists, this content can
affect the experiencer’s beliefs—beliefs shape the form of the experiences,
and the experiences in turn shape the beliefs—and thus the experiences may
be cognitive of a transcendent reality. But, like all Kantians, they accept that
direct knowledge of noumena is impossible.
     Strong constructivists go further: all the belief-content of depth-
mystical experiences is supplied solely by the mystic’s existing tradition.
Transcendent realities contribute nothing, even if they exist and are in fact
experienced (and Katz accepts that possibility [1988: 754]). In the case of
sense-experience, moderate constructivists give the world a role in
scientific and everyday knowledge-claims. For them, as for
nonconstructivists, mystical experiences are also potentially cognitive. But
strong constructivists deny, as do postmodernists, that the world ultimately
plays any role at all: the world-in-itself, if there is such a reality, is
amorphous, and so any configuration of concepts will do for coping with
the world—we can make any “web of beliefs” fit by simply making enough
adjustments to its parts—and thus in the final analysis reality does not
constrain our creations. There is no role for any unknowable noumenon.
Thus, any external “real” world in the end does not figure in determining
our knowledge-claims; instead, our concepts exclusively shape our
knowledge-claims. And when strong constructivism is combined with
naturalism, the issue of a role for a transcendent reality does not even come
up. Attention turns from experiences solely to what mystics write since
“everything is text all the way down.”
     Thus, strong constructivists go beyond claiming belief is one
component in religious experiences to claiming it is the only component.
The religious beliefs that mystics bring to their experiences do not merely
contribute to their knowledge but are the only cognitive element. Strong
constructivists thus assimilate knowledge-claims totally to the
nonexperiential and the cultural. Mystical experiences are merely an intense
feeling of our previous beliefs. They become, in the words of Robert
Gimello, “simply the psychosomatic enhancement of religious beliefs and
values” (in Katz 1978: 85). One postmodernist scholar questions whether
memories of “mystical experiences” have any more transcendent “mystical
content” than alien abductees’ “memories” of their alleged abductions have
any genuine content (Sharf 1998). The conceptual framework of a religious
tradition brought to the experience controls the content entirely. The
cognitive content of any religious experience is thereby totally reduced to
that belief-framework. There is no possibility of any independent cognitive
input from a transcendent source. Mystical experiences thus cannot be
sources of any potentially fresh insight for anyone’s system of belief. For
the same reason, prior experiences did not shape the conceptual framework
one brings to later religious experiences. Thus, for strong constructivists,
mystical experiences cannot add anything at any point in the history of a
mystical tradition to its beliefs or values or otherwise enter the cognitive
picture.
      Thus, to constructivists, depth-mystical experiences, contrary to the
depth-mystics’ own claims of “empty” experiences, must have at least some
conceptual content or else mystics would not be conscious. Beliefs and
concepts penetrate the experiences themselves and are not applied after the
fact in a separate act of interpretation. Meditation does not involve
emptying the mind of a culture’s framework, thereby permitting new
cognitive experiences, but simply helps the meditator to internalize fully the
culture’s beliefs and values learned on the path. Thus, yoga properly
understood is not an unconditioning or deconditioning of consciousness but
rather a reconditioning of consciousness, i.e., a substituting of one form of
conditioned consciousness for another (Katz 1978: 57).16 The Japanese
Buddhist Dogen told his followers to cast aside their own mind and follow
the teachings of the Buddha; to constructivists, this simply means
indoctrination. Enlightenment is merely the final internalization of a
religion’s framework of beliefs—the culmination of long periods of intense
study, practice, and commitment to those specific beliefs and values.
      Strong constructivism, in sum, rules out the possibility that mystics
have any knowledge of a transcendent reality, even if mystics do experience
such a reality: nonexperiential cultural belief-systems control everything
about the experience’s cognitive content. Thus, there is no such thing as
mystical knowledge in any real sense. Any experiential input from a
transcendent source is totally shaped by our concepts and cannot provide
any cognitive content about reality—there simply is no independent
cognitive component in it. All mystical experiential claims thus can be
dismissed as groundless: even if they are experiences of a transcendent
reality, how could they be used to justify beliefs about that reality when the
total cognitive content comes only from cultural beliefs?
      In effect, strong constructivists go from the fact that our mind
generates concepts to the conclusion that this is all there is to the cognitive
content of mystical experiences. Mystics’ knowledge-claims are controlled
totally by their concepts, and so in the end any experienced reality drops
completely out of the epistemic picture. Moderate constructivists argue that
the mind contributes to every genuine religious experience but that the
transcendent realities do too. So too, there may be different degrees of
mediation. To Bernard McGinn (1994, 1998), in Christian mysticism there
is a direct mystical consciousness of God, but it is, in the theologian
Bernard Lonegran’s phrase, a “mediated immediacy.” Thereby, the total
cognitive content of religious experiences is not reducible to an
experiencer’s prior doctrines, and mystical experiences of transcendent
realities can offer some input constraining our knowledge-claims. Moderate
constructivists argue that reality and the structuring we supply are
inextricably mixed in our experiences and our knowledge, but strong
constructivists conclude that concepts are simply our creations and have no
connection to anything but the other concepts we create. Strong
constructivists thus reduce the cognitive content of any mystical experience,
while moderates do not.
      Moderate constructivism can be applied without much objection to
many types of religious experiences. That experiencers’ prior religious and
nonreligious beliefs shape the experiences they undergo certainly seems to
be the case with visions: experiencers do not claim to sense a vague,
amorphous presence but to see Jesus or some other figure from their own
religious tradition shaped by their beliefs. Their tradition seems to be the
source of the form of what is experienced—Protestants do not have visions
of Mary and Muslims never see Krishna. (Ramakrishna claimed to have had
visions of Jesus and Muhammad, and the Dalai Lama of a smiling Mary at
Fatima, but these also can be the result of prior beliefs.) Such numinous
experiences are enough like sense-perceptions that they should be open to
an analysis similar to ordinary sense-perceptions. Similarly, in the vast
majority of cases, those who pray and hear a voice hear only confirmations
of their prior beliefs. So too, extrovertive mystical experiences involve
structured sensory content, and so constructivism may well apply to these
experiences. That those extrovertive mystical experiences that involve
seeing the world infused with love only seem to occur in traditions that treat
God as love also suggests that these experiences are a cultural product.
Mindfulness too seems amenable to constructivism: mystics can admit that
the mind in mindful states, including enlightened ones, contains
differentiated phenomena and thus may be structured by prior beliefs. The
only exception would be the extreme case of “pure” mindfulness: there
would be differentiable content but no structuring. Other mindful states’
content and structuring would depend in part on concepts and beliefs from
each mystic’s tradition. So too with introvertive differentiated experiences:
they may be structured with concepts from different religious and cultural
traditions. The question is whether constructivism applies to depth-mystical
experiences.17