Introvertive Mystical Experiences
The second class of mystical experiences occurs in the concentrative track
of meditation when there is no sensory input. It leads to an introvertive
awareness of a transcendent reality underlying at least all of the
experiencer’s subjective phenomena or in fact all natural phenomena. Such
a reality can be called another “level” of reality than the phenomenal world
since it is the source of at least something in the natural world. An
important distinction here is between introvertive mystical experiences with
differentiable content and those without. Both theistic and nontheistic
experiences occur in the first group. In theistic experiences, the
differentiated content seems personal in nature. Introvertive experiences
may be what Teresa of Avila referred as “supernatural” and John of the
Cross called “infused contemplation.” With these experiences, there is a
change in the state of consciousness from both ordinary awareness and
extrovertive mystical experiences: attention shifts from the phenomenal
realm to an inner wellspring of reality lying outside the realm of time and
change that grounds either phenomenal consciousness or all of the
phenomenal realm. The inward turn begins with objects of concentration,
but it is not a matter replacing the content with an image of nothingness
(e.g., a big, black, silent, empty space), but of eventually emptying the mind
of all thought, emotion, sensation, and any other internal distinguishable
content. Extrovertive states may be long-lasting or even permanent, but
introvertive experiences are transient, being disrupted by life in the
phenomenal world.
      Theistic introvertive mystical experiences are differentiated since there
is a sense of a self realizing another reality. That is, there are dualistic
introvertive experiences where differentiated phenomena are not yet
eradicated, and theists take what is sensed as an experience of an active
separate self—the presence of the benevolent transcendent God loving the
experiencer. This sense is especially strong when a sense of bliss is part of
the experience itself. Nontheists may dismiss this as merely the product of
enculturation in a theistic society or of the mystical training in a theistic
tradition and not the presence of God but merely the experiencer’s own
subconscious. “Love mysticism” is then seen as dominating Christianity
only because the doctrine of God’s unconditional love is central to Christian
theology, not because of anything experiential. But theists take the sense of
being unconditionally loved as a genuine part of a theistic introvertive
experience itself.
      Whether theists are correct or not, it does appear from the mystical
texts that these experiences differ in nature from the “empty” depth-
experience: the experiences themselves still involve differentiated content
of a personal character. They are not merely theistic postexperience
interpretations of the depth-experience, contra Walter Stace (1960a) and
Ninian Smart (1965). But Stace discounted all theistic descriptions of
mystical experiences as obviously interpretations, while accepting
nontheistic descriptions as closer to a bare description, for philosophical
reasons: he wanted to use the latter descriptions in an argument from
unanimity to support mystical knowledge-claims and had to get around the
conflict of theistic and nontheistic accounts. Theists may just as easily
discount nontheistic interpretations for a similar reason. But without such
philosophical or theological agendas and from the phenomenological data
alone, we should accept that there are two types of introvertive mystical
experiences—some with a sense of differentiated content (either personal or
nonpersonal) and some without. Some theistic mystics such as Meister
Eckhart and Jan van Ruusbroec appear to have had both differentiated
introvertive theistic mystical experiences and the depth-mystical
experience.20 Love does not dominate Islamic theology, but some Muslim
mystics such as Jalal al-din Rumi make love central. Such theistic
experiences also occur outside the Abrahamic traditions to, for example,
bhakti Hindus. (These may have influenced the love tradition in Sufism.)
Because these introvertive experiences are differentiated, it is possible that
there may be a unique flavor to theistic experiences in each tradition—i.e., a
“Christian theistic experience” differing from a Muslim one, and so on.