Attribution Theory
A second position is that there are no genuine “mystical experiences”:
alleged mystical experiences are only ordinary experiences, not unique
neurological events. The “mystical” element is only a misreading of what is
occurring. Thus, proponents of this position note the experiential nature of
“mystical experiences,” but they deny that the mystical overlay contributes
anything cognitive—in particular, there is no cognition of transcendent
realities. John Bowker presented this theory, not to discredit the notion of
genuine –mystical experiences, but to discredit the theory that the idea of
God originated in psychotropic drug experiences. He argued that LSD does
not induce genuine experiences of a transcendent reality but only initiates a
state of excitation that is labeled and interpreted from the available cues as
“religious” by some experiencers, due to the setting and the experiencers’
background. The warrant for a particular label thus does not lie in the
experience itself but in the conceptual background that created specific
expectations and supplied the symbols to the structuring (1973: 14457).
      However, this idea can also be used to discredit any claim to
knowledge of transcendent realities. Wayne Proudfoot offers this “cognitive
labeling” approach to deny the possibility of any transcendent input in any
religious experiences: experiencers unconsciously attribute religious
significance to otherwise ordinary experiences (1985). Religious
experiences are simply general and diffuse patterns of agitation in states of
our nervous system to which the religious give a label based on their prior
religious beliefs, in order to understand and explain the agitation. Any
extreme emotional state can be labeled “a religious experience” when an
experiencer believes that the cause is a transcendent reality, but in fact only
cognitively empty feelings are present—bodily states agitated in purely
natural ways. For Proudfoot, a transcendent reality is not even indirectly
involved as the source of the agitation (ibid.: 154). That is ruled out a priori:
a transcendent reality, if any exists, by definition cannot be experienced. So
too, Ann Taves speaks of ordinary experiences being “deemed religious”—
there are no inherently religious experiences (2009).5 Religious experiences
are in fact no more than cognitively empty feelings structured by prior
religious beliefs. That is, religious value or significance is given to unusual
but otherwise ordinary experiences. “Religious experiences” are constituted
solely by this-worldly elements and thus are exhaustively explainable in the
same manner as any other experience. This approach allows scholars to
focus exclusively on religious texts and discount any role for any “mystical
experience” in the formation of religious doctrines and practices.
      Attribution theory may well explain many alleged mystical
experiences: people may simply be attributing greater significance to
ordinary highly emotional situations in many instances. (This points to the
problem with first-person reports and surveys noted in chapter 4.) And
some evidence in neuroscience can be interpreted as supporting the theory
(Saver & Rubin 1997; Azari et al. 2001). But as noted above, there is also
increasing neuroscientific support for the claim that there are genuine
mystical experiences—i.e., unique neurological events involving altered
states of consciousness. Objections have also been raised concerning
Proudfoot’s use of the psychological data (Barnard 1992; Spilka &
McIntosh 1995). If such experiences are neurologically unique and not
merely other experiences interpreted mystically, they are not reducible in
this manner. Taves lumps all religious experiences together and concludes
that no experience is inherently religious (2009: 20–22). But the issue here
is different: whether there is a set of inherently mystical experiences,
regardless of whether the understanding that a particular experiencer gives
it is religious or naturalistic. And neurological data suggest that some
experiences are inherently mystical even if the experiences are understood
nonreligiously by the experiencer. Perhaps the religious can give a religious
interpretation to virtually any experience, but there appears to be a set of a
neurologically distinctive mystical experiences. If so, there is an
experiential basis to mysticism that cannot be explained away as merely a
mystical varnish given to ordinary sense-experiences or emotions.
      Mystical experiences often have an intense emotional component, and
if such experiences are grounded only in the part of the brain connected to
emotion rather than thought (Ramachandran & Blakeslee 1998: 179), it
would help the argument that mystical experiences simply reinforce the
experiencer’s prior religious beliefs. Bertrand Russell saw mysticism in
terms of emotion—a certain intense and deep feeling regarding what is
believed about the universe (1997: 186–87)—and James Leuba advanced an
early reduction of mysticism along these lines (1929). But even if these
experiences have an emotional impact, this does not mean that they are the
result only of emotion or do not have other components. It should also be
pointed out that emotions may be ways of experiencing the world that
contribute to our deepest commitments and our sense of how things are
(Ratcliffe 2006: 101). That emotion and their objects are traditionally chief
objects for meditators to remove since they block spiritual progress also
presents a problem for this theory. So too, the “sense of presence” in
religious experiences is not obviously emotion-based.
      For naturalists, this means that all alleged mystical cognitivity is
totally explained away in natural terms. But whether one subscribes to this
philosophical reduction appears to depend more on whether one has a prior
commitment to naturalism than anything inherent in the experiences
themselves.