Can the Constructivism Dispute Be Resolved?
None of these points suggest that mystical experiences are as
“conservative” as Katz argues (1983: 3–60).25 Indeed, nonconstructivists
appear to have the overall stronger case. However, one basic problem
forecloses any definitive resolution: all there can ever be are later accounts
of what occurred during a depth-experience. All experiences are private,
and mystics can only give us a postexperience depiction of the depth-
mystical experience. All such depictions can occur only outside that
experience in a different state of consciousness, and thus mystics cannot
present us with a depiction of the depth-mystical experience free of their
particular conceptual commitments. That is, to communicate, mystics will
have to be in a state of consciousness where they can utilize the
differentiations of language, and they will use whatever conceptual scheme
they have adopted, and this is all we will ever have. To use an analogy: in
mystics’ reports, we are presented with various colored lights without being
able to examine the light source first hand (Dasgupta 1971: 68–69). The
lights may be one white light with various colored coverings (the
nonconstructivist position of a content-free depth-mystical experience, with
different interpretations applied after the experience is over), or the lights
themselves may be colored (the constructivist position of concepts being
embedded in the experience itself)—but all we can ever see from the
outside are the colored lights, and by themselves these cannot resolve the
issue. So too, the mystics’ accounts will always be “colored”
(conceptualized), and thus we are unable to observe the source itself
directly to resolve the issue. Thus, our decision on the question of
constructivism will have to be on other grounds.
      Nonconstructivists conclude that there is a common experience based
on the low-ramified descriptions from mystical accounts from around the
world.26 They must also reject a bedrock principle of modern philosophy—
that all experiences are permeated by conceptualizing. But they operate
with the premise that mystics are in a privileged position for the issue of
whether the depth-mystical experience is free of intentional content, and so
nonmystics should accept their word that there is an experience free of all
conceptual and other differentiated elements. Actual experience trumps
theory. Constructivists counter that people may well misconstrue their own
experiences and that constructivism fits better with the generally accepted
philosophical view of the nature of sense-experience. Thus, they think that
the constructivist reduction of the cognitive content of the depth-experience
to prior beliefs is the best available explanation.
      But the assumption that our linguistic concepts penetrate our normal
sense-experiences is actually open to question. Sallie King points out that
one’s first drink of coffee may be “mediated by cultural factors and
expectations,” but she rightly asks, how do these relate to the first taste
itself? How is this experience produced by the pre-existing context of
tradition (1988: 264)? We know the label “taste of coffee” applies, but how
does that label affect the actual experience? Or consider Benjamin Lee
Whorf’s claim that perceptions differ between speakers of unrelated
languages because all observation is theory-laden (1956: 212–13). Merely
because the traditional language of the Hopi Indians classifies all “flying
things” together with one term does not mean that they cannot distinguish
airplanes, pilots, and insects. And the issue of whether there is a
nonconceptual element to ordinary sense-perception has recently been
revived (Gunther 2003). Consider Ptolemy and Copernicus viewing a
sunset: they differed radically about what occurs in a sunset, but whether
they actually experienced a sunset differently is another question—how can
their highly ramified concepts affect their perceptions when we cannot
experience that the earth is turning? Even Katz exempts experiences on “the
most brutish, infantile, and sensate levels” (1988: 755). That admission
opens the door to there being other types of unstructured experiences.
      In light of considerations such as these, the constructivists’ case is
severely weakened. If mystics sense a difference in epistemic character
between the ordinary state of consciousness and the “empty” depth-mystical
experience, then the mystics’ accounts of their own experiences are at least
prima facie evidence against constructivism and in favor of the idea that the
depth-mystical experience is in fact a state of consciousness free of all
differentiable content. Nonconstructivists rightly defer to the mystics here:
only mystics are aware of both differentiated experiences and the depth-
mystical experience, and they claim the latter is radically different in type.
All experiencers are in a privileged position for the phenomenology of their
own experiences (but not for their evaluations of the experiences’ cognitive
status, as discussed in the next chapter). This applies equally to mystics. If
mystics sense differentiated phenomena after the depth-experience and are
aware that those were not present during the depth-experience, we should
accept it.
     One may also ask how constructivists know that an “empty” state of
consciousness is impossible for human beings the way we are constructed
(Katz 1978: 59). Can philosophers legislate what is possible (Evans 1989)?
A state of consciousness empty of content certainly is not logically
impossible. Constructivists must also counter the empirical neurological
studies suggesting the possibility of a “pure consciousness” noted above.
These studies do not show that these experiences are actually structured
with differences in structuring from each culture being irrelevant but that
the experiences are structure-free. However, constructivists do not rely on
any empirical evidence at all. Indeed, constructivists are not making
empirically based claims at all (contra Katz 1978: 66) but simply
uncritically applying a principle devised for one type of experience to other
experiences. By doing so, they are putting an a priori limit on what is
logically possible, and such reasoning is out of place in a science-based
culture. Nonmystics simply are not in a position to deny that such empty
experiences can occur.
     In addition, even in relying on mystical texts alone, constructivists
must reject much of what Asian and Western mystics actually say: they
must dismiss accounts by mystics themselves that entail that some mystical
experiences are empty of differentiable content, and they must also dismiss
any talk of “forgetting” or “unknowing” as obviously wrong. But since
constructivists apply their principle—their “single epistemological
assumption” that there are no unmediated experiences (Katz 1978: 26)—in
advance of any actual study, no amount of mystics’ accounts will ever
convince constructivists they are wrong: with the constructivists’ strategy,
nothing mystics could say could provide counter-evidence to constructivism
even in principle since whatever mystics say after their experiences will
reflect their tradition’s doctrines, and constructivists will automatically take
this as evidence for their conclusion that was already predetermined by their
prior assumption. It would also not be empirical for constructivists to argue
that certain mystical reports must be false merely on the a priori ground that
no experience in principle can be free of content. Even if constructivists had
depth-mystical experiences themselves, the transitional state back to
ordinary consciousness will be filled with content from their beliefs and
emotions, and constructionists may well misconstrue the situation, seeing
the beliefs as permeating the depth-mystical experience itself. Thus,
constructivism applied to the depth-mystical experience ends up being
unfalsifiable in practice, whether by analyzing texts or even by having a
depth-mystical experience itself.
      Constructivists correctly point out that there is no one abstract
“mysticism” or one common mystical tradition spanning all cultures, but
instead a variety of more specific mystical systems—in fact, more than one
even within each religious tradition. Mysticism is not identical from culture
to culture or era to era. This diversity, however, does not support
constructivism over nonconstructivism: nonconstructivists have no problem
agreeing that there are genuinely different mystical traditions—they merely
argue that this diversity only reflects the diversity of the interpretations that
mystics apply after the depth-mystical experience is over. That is, mystics
do bring their cultural beliefs and values to their experiences, and these do
influence their own later understanding of their own experiences, but this
does not mean that the concepts must be active during the experiences
themselves. There still can be one common depth-mystical experience that
is independent of culture: the diversity of interpretations only reflects the
diversity of the metaphysics of the world’s different religious traditions
applied after the experience, not differences within depth-experiences
themselves, and this diversity of concrete accounts that mystics employ to
understand their experiences must be studied rather than claims about some
abstract “mysticism” being advanced. Nonconstructivists thus can equally
affirm the need to study mystics in context to understand mystical
knowledge-claims. They can accept Katz’s “plea” for the recognition of
differences (1978: 25)—they only insist that the differences lie in the
postexperience doctrines and values of different ways of life.
     In sum, the importance of context can be affirmed by
nonconstructivists without imposing what becomes in this context a dogma
of modern philosophy onto the depth-mystical experience. Contrary to what
constructivists claim, nonconstructivists are not committed to the position
that all mysticism is ultimately the same: different mystical knowledge-
claims contain different conceptual elements that genuinely distinguish the
claims of different traditions. Thus, mystical traditions remain different
even if all depth-mystical experiences are the same. Nonconstructivism is
also consistent with different positions on the relation of mystical traditions
—constructing a perennial philosophy, accepting one mystical tradition as
the best, accepting a relativism of all existing mystical traditions, or
rejecting all mystical knowledge-claims in favor of naturalism.
     The dispute thus comes down to whether we give more weight to what
the mystics say or to what philosophers say about the nature of other
experiences. In the end, whether one subscribes to extending constructivism
to depth-mystical experiences may depend more on whether one has a prior
commitment to reducing mysticism than anything inherent in the depth-
mystical experience itself. But it must be said that constructivists do not
present a strong case. Their case is built only on imposing philosophical
ideas onto mysticism that were developed for other types of experiences,
not studying mystics first and then devising a theory—they had their
conclusion already made before they turned to mysticism. Nor is their
position the result of any firsthand mystical experiences. Thus, in the end
they have no reason other than an argument based on other experiences to
rule out the possibility of an event of an object-free consciousness. This is a
very risky way to rule out the very possibility that mystics might have a
genuine insight into the nature of reality.