It is very common today to claim that mystics are irrational: their discourse
is “beyond reason,” “logic does not apply to mystical discourse,” mystics
are “unconstrained by logic” or have “abandoned the intellect.” They are
claimed to have “their own unique logic,” or to be unable to speak without
falling into “contradictions and gibberish.” Scholars routinely declare that
mystics are by definition irrational, without further discussion (e.g.,
Garfield & Priest 2003). Indeed, mysticism is often considered the very
paradigm of irrationality, and conversely any irrational claim is label
“mystical.” Mystics’ alleged irrationality is taken as grounds to place
mystical experiences among the emotions rather than among cognitive
activities. However, such claims do not hold up when mystics’ writings are
actually examined. In fact, their writings are typically rational by traditional
“Western” standards. This is not to deny that mystics often revel in paradox,
but only to claim that mystics can also produce rational arguments on
occasion and that the paradoxes can be explained.1
      In chapter 3, one question was whether it is rational for mystics or
nonmystics to accept mystical cognitive claims or to adopt a mystical way
of life today. Here the issue is whether mystics themselves “think
rationally” in the statements and arguments they make. As noted in chapter
3, today persons usually are called irrational only if their thoughts or actions
defy the well-established knowledge of their day or if their beliefs are not
coherent but contain blatant contradictions. Of course, what is considered
the “best knowledge of the day” varies from culture to culture and era to
era. Thus, what it is to be rational will depend on the reasons and beliefs of
a particular culture and era: they determine what is “reasonable,” “natural,
“logical,” and “plausible.” It was once rational to believe that the earth was
flat and did not move, but that is no longer rational. Mystics from classical
cultures will differ from modern “common sense” in the premises of their
arguments and perhaps in what is taken to be a reasonable inference, both
because their experiential base is broader than ours and because the beliefs
of different premodern cultures differ from modern science-inspired beliefs,
and what is accepted as “rational” in science may change as research
progresses. But that does not mean that mystics are necessarily irrational in
their reasoning. Today naturalists may equate “being rational” with “being
scientific,” but it is not obvious that accepting experiences as cognitive that
cannot be checked in a third-person empirical manner, as scientific claims
in principle should be, necessarily make mystics irrational in their
reasoning. (Mystics must also find transcendent claims meaningful, even if
philosophers today raise objections.)
      Logic was not a major topic of concern to classical mystics.2
Nevertheless, mystics can be as logical as nonmystics. For example,
Shankara argued that contradictory properties cannot exist together
(Brahma-sutra-bhashya 2.1.27), and much of his commentaries on the
Upanishads deals with resolving apparent contradictions. So too, mystics’
arguments may be logical in their structure by Western Aristotelian
standards. A culture need not devise an Aristotelian syllogism to follow the
rules implicitly. And mystics’ writings do typically implicitly abide by the
three basic principles central to Aristotelian logic: the law of identity (x is x
and not not-x), the law of noncontradiction (that nothing can be both x and
not x), and the law of the excluded middle (that anything is either x or not x
with no third possibility). In Indian philosophy, all schools accept some
form of inference (anumana) as a means to at least the conventional kind of
correct knowledge. But the reasoning is in terms of concrete things found in
our experience of the world rather than in terms of necessities and
probabilities, and there are no discussions of logical principles in the
abstract or why these laws should be accepted. The syllogisms in the Nyaya
Hindu school and Madhyamaka Buddhism differ in form from Western
ones; in particular, examples (both positive and sometimes negative
examples supporting a premise) are an element in the formal syllogism.
What counts as a “necessary truth” or an induction does vary because of
differences in the premises accepted and in what is considered important.
Thus, even if there are some cross-cultural standards of reasoning, the
criteria that each mystic employs to make judgments concerning different
experiences and the views of other traditions may be internal to that
mystic’s tradition.3 But the deductions themselves (i.e., truth-preserving
inferences) obey the Aristotelian rules. If so, this is a bulwark against any
complete postmodernist relativism in rationality in an argument.4
      In sum, rationality requires having good reasons for one’s beliefs and
actions, but such reasons and some aspects of valid arguments will be
defined by one’s culture. However, if classical mystics accept the best
knowledge of their culture and era and are logical in their reasoning, then it
can be concluded that they are rational in the only way that can be judged
today. (Note that this does not mean that classical mystics are being judged
rational by alien cultural standards; rather, what would be shown is that the
Aristotelian rules of logic are in fact implicit in their own standards of
reasoning. Nor is the issue in the present chapter the one considered in
chapter 3 of whether we would deem mystics to be rational today in
believing the mystical claims of an earlier time and culture.) Whether
mystics accept the best knowledge of their culture and era does not seem to
be an issue. The metaphysical premises that classical mystics in various
culture endorse may seem problematic in light of our modern beliefs, but
they too are not an issue for rationality. Rather, the issue is how mystics
argue. This question will be addressed here by looking at two topics: the
alleged paradigm of mystical irrationality (paradox), and a case study of
one mystic’s way of arguing (the Madhyamaka Buddhist Nagarjuna). But
first a note on differences in the general style of reasoning among cultures.