The Nature of Transcendent Realities
If transcendent realities exist, can introvertive mystical experiences
contribute to any knowledge of their nature? Do the phenomenological
depictions entail any specific doctrines beyond being real, one, immutable,
and transcendent, or are all doctrines on the nature of what was experienced
more speculative?
      The lack of any highly ramified conceptions of what was experienced
common to all or most traditions is again the problem. The depth-mystical
experience may entail seeing the consciousness that is experienced there as
the ontic ground of the true self, but seeing that consciousness as
ontologically more than that requires further considerations. How could we
tell from the experience that it is the source of the rest of the universe? The
experience may seem overwhelmingly powerful and profound, but any
metaphysical claim remains a theory going beyond the experience. So too,
as discussed, mystics differ on exactly what is the relation between the
transcendent reality and the phenomenal world: emanation, creation, or the
world as appearance? In addition, how could we conclude that what is
experienced is inexhaustible? Mystics may be experiencing “pure
beingness,” but how could they know they have reached the ultimate
ground of being? Perhaps there is no one source to everything, but a
pluralism of basic realities as with Samkhya. And whether there is a further
reality grounding what is transcendent to our world cannot be ascertained
by these experiences, even if the overwhelming sense of reality in what is
experienced naturally leads mystics to believe that they have experienced
the ground of the self or of this world and to the conviction that they have
touched the ultimate ground.
      If the “empty” depth-mystical experience is in fact an experience of a
transcendent reality, it would also be hard to conclude that members of one
religion experience one transcendent reality while members of other
religions experience other realities—e.g., theists experience a loving reality
while nontheists experience a second, morally neutral reality. It is certainly
hard to believe that there are multiple creators of the natural world or
multiple sources of beingness—as if different gods in different theistic
traditions created the parts of the world where each theistic tradition
predominates and different nonpersonal sources created the nontheistic
parts. Nor is there any other reason based on the experiences themselves to
conclude that more than one reality could be the subject of the experiences.
      But how can theistic mystical experiences tell us that there is only one
god, or that all theistic mystical experiences are of the same god? The
simplicity of the depth-mystical experience suggests that only one reality
could be involved, but theistic introvertive experiences have some
differentiated content. Perhaps Muslims experience Allah and Vaishnavites
Krishna. Of course, theists may reject polytheism or other multiple
transcendent realities, the conclusion being that theistic mystical
experiences are all of the same god with only different flavors depending on
the experiencer’s doctrines. But this will be for theological reasons, not
mystical experiential ones. Theistic mystical experiences may be
justification for accepting the source as a loving creator/sustainer god, but
no other theological doctrines are entailed. For example, such experiences
would not favor a trinitarian Christian view of God over the simpler Jewish
and Muslim monotheism. So too, as mentioned in chapter 3, the traditional
omnipotence, omniscience, and omnibenevolence of a theistic god cannot
be justified by any experience. Mystical experiences suggest a simplicity to
God, not an active Wizard of Oz–type designer god with many different
properties, powers, and functions pulling levers behind the curtain. (The
theological sense of “simplicity,” in which theologians argue that virtues
converge, is different from the simplicity of the “emptiness” of the depth-
mystical experience, but is an attempt to overcome the tension between
theological ideas of a god and the experienced simplicity.) Similarly, as
noted earlier, no mystical experience of beingness can entail that there is a
purpose or design to the universe. Nonmystical considerations will decide
such issues. For example, Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’s scientific interest in
evolution led him to try combining teleology and mysticism into one
speculative system (1959).
      In addition, introvertive theistic and depth-mystical experiences lead in
opposite directions on the basic issue of whether what is experienced is
personal or nonpersonal. Perhaps there are two realities: the ground of
being experienced in the depth-experience and a theistic god experienced in
theistic experiences. As Gershom Scholem says, it “takes a tremendous
effort” to identify the source of the revelations received by Moses and
Mohammed with that received by the Kabbalists and Hasidic Jews or by the
Muslims Ibn Arabi and al-Hallaj (1967: 10). If they are not two separate
and equal realities, this leads to the issue of which is ontologically more
fundamental: is Brahman the “abode” of Vishnu or vice versa? If we take
the depth-mystical experience as more insightful, then the ultimate ground
of reality is not a personal, loving god. But nothing in the experiences
themselves can determine which type is deeper. The depth-mystical
experience may be the experience of only God’s nonpersonal being, or it
may be the experience of some deeper reality.20 Nonmystical theological
considerations will prevail on that issue. For example, theistic religion
requires an active personal reality with whom the faithful can have a
personal relationship—in effect, a living being with a mind and will who is
worthy of trust and worship. Any Neoplatonist One or Eckhartian Godhead
may make the transcendent reality seem more majestic by being constant,
inactive, and remote, but this can also make it seem indifferent to the world
and its creatures—“beyond good and evil” rather than loving and moral. If
one values personhood, one may see a transcendent reality as personal; if
not, one may emphasize consciousness without the limitations of a person.
Mystical experiences of God as a source may suggest that more feminine
symbolism would be appropriate, but theists also believe that God is
causally active in nature and human history, answering prayers and
performing other miracles—ideas not given in mystical experiences even of
a loving God in which God loves the experiencer and everything else as is.
Even if God is pure love, how a god who is unchanging, inactive, and
existing outside the realm of time can possibly act in the temporal universe
is a topic for theologians, but nothing on this subject could be revealed in
mystical experiences—an “empty” experience of only beingness or a sense
of being loved could not supply any information on the mechanisms of how
this is possible. The idea of special incarnations of God or Vishnu would
also come from nonmystical sources—if anything, from mystical
experiences, we would conclude that all beings are emanations of a god.
There is also the danger that, while theistic mystics may rationally believe
that a transcendent person is involved, we may simply be projecting our
own beliefs of what a “person” is onto that reality—in fact, an “empty”
experience may give anthropomorphism the opportunity to run wild.
      Moreover, even if mystics know something of the nature of a
transcendent reality, they typically affirm a depth to it that is unfathomable
and thus not fully knowable. The reality is still “deep and profound,” to
quote Laozi on the Way, although we can align our life with it. If a
transcendent reality is open to unmediated experience, then there is no
unknowable Kantian noumenon to it, but there may also remain an
unknowable aspect, as with the Eyn Sof of the Kabbalists. The reality is not
ontologically “wholly other” since we can experience it directly: our natural
realm shares its beingness, but its nature or mode of existence is different,
and so the mystery surrounding it ends up being impenetrable by either our
thought or our experience. That is, it can be known in the sense of being
directly experienced, but its full abundance cannot be known with the
analytical mind or in a mystical experience. The otherness of its nature from
all worldly phenomena leads to the denial that any terms can apply to it (the
via negativa) in dealing with its nature, as discussed in the next chapter.
      Thus, even with mystical experiences the mystery of any transcendent
realities remains: even knowledge by participation of such a reality does not
help finite beings such as ourselves to know the ultimate depth of reality.
What is experienced may be a paradigm of the “God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob” rather than the explanatory posit of the “God of the philosophers
and scholars,” but the experiences remain “shafts of light” coming from an
unfathomable “darkness” that remains mysterious even to mystics. What is
experienced is not terrifying, as in many numinous experiences, but its
nature remains unknowable in the sense of being the subject of propositions
concerning attributes.
      Religious theorists in all traditions end up running into trouble when
trying to flesh out the implications of basic doctrines. For example,
Christian theologians have the problem of how God can be all-powerful
without wiping out our free will. Advaitins have the basic problem that if
Brahman alone is real, then how and from where did the root-ignorance and
the realm of illusion arise? Mystics would tend to try to cut the veil of
doctrines and return the conversation toward directly experiencing
transcendent realities. They may treat terms such as “God” as only
placeholders for the mystery they experienced, and they may treat any
attempt to make transcendent realities into knowable objects as idolatry. But
mystics too need conceptualizations to ground a way of life and a
soteriological goal. They obviously are not agnostic about the existence of
what was experienced, but they also cannot remain agnostic or completely
skeptical about the nature of what is experienced: they must have some
conceptions in dualistic consciousness of what was experienced in order to
align their lives with reality. Thus, even classical mystics must take
doctrines with some seriousness.