Constructivism and the Depth-Mystical Experience
Thus, under strong constructivism, mystical experiences are no more
cognitive than when Catholics see the face of Mary in a rusted refrigerator
on a back porch. And many who think that strong constructivism is absurd
in cases of sense-experience—to nonpostmodernists, reality obviously
provides constraints on our everyday and scientific constructions—find
strong constructivism attractive when it comes to mystical experiences.20
Strong constructivism neatly combines a popular philosophical position on
sense-perception with a popular academic view on religion (the reduction of
religion to belief-claims). Strong constructivism also reflects academics’
general love of all things linguistic and their unease over anything that even
hints of the possibility of ineffability—in particular, philosophers see
knowledge as a matter of propositions alone and are suspicious of any
appeal to anything that is nonpropositional in nature.
      Constructivists may also argue that experiencers typically report their
experiences in terms of cultural stereotypes that do not really reflect the
experiences themselves—e.g., experiencers may claim a “pure awareness”
when they in fact had none. Thus, we cannot tell with any certainty whether
the conceptualizations point to the same experience or to the same reality
being experienced. It may be that any unusual experience will be described
as “ineffable,” “paradoxical,” or “union with God.” Thus, little of the actual
experiential content may be revealed even by the low-ramified descriptions.
However, this claim is not very convincing: that might be true of “union
with God,” but no culture has “pure consciousness” as a standard trope.21
Indeed, the only real reason strong constructivists can offer for their
position on depth-mystical experiences is that it conforms with the claim
that ordinary sense-experiences are structured. Their position is based on
philosophy and not on any empirical investigation of mystical experiences.
(If the depth-mystical experience cannot be analogized to sense-perception,
as argued in the next chapter, their position is weakened further.) That there
may be a cognitive state of consciousness without an intentional object is
simply logically impossible to philosophers who address the situation with
the presumption that all mental states are intentional. Constructivism is
merely applied to mystical experiences without seriously examining the
possibility that the depth-mystical experience may in fact be unique. This
means that when constructivists claim that the depth-mystical experience
must be structured, they are in effect making only an assumption
concerning this experience based solely on other types of experience (as
Katz acknowledges in the quotation given above [1978: 26]), not reaching a
conclusion based on any empirical research on mystics (contra ibid.: 66).
      Nonconstructivists in fact have a very strong case against both
moderate and strong constructivism. First, there is empirical evidence in
neuroscience against the constructivist interpretation of the depth-mystical
sense-experiences: a “pure consciousness” event may in fact be
neurologically possible (Hood 2006; Newberg, d’Aquili, & Rause 2002;
also see Hölzel et al. 2011a: 545). Also, Zen meditation may enable
practitioners to control the automatic cascade of conceptual association
triggered by semantic stimuli (Pagnoni et al. 2008). There is also evidence
that experiences in general occur slightly before both cognition and the
translation of the awareness into language (Newberg & Waldman 2009: 75).
Even a materialist who thinks the brain and mind are identical and that no
transcendent reality is involved in a depth-mystical experience can argue
against constructivism and for a genuine pure consciousness event: the
monitoring activity of the mind continues in the absence of any
representational processing; thus, when the mind is emptied of all sensory,
conceptual, and ideational content, a lucid conscious states results (Peters
2000). The experiences are identical across cultures simply because of the
common biology of the brain of all human beings.22
     Second, an argument can be made by the position mystics are in. In
ordinary perception, we do not experience a patch of colors and interpret it
as a rug. There is only one act—seeing a rug. This may also apply to
visions, most types of extrovertive and introvertive mystical experiences,
and mindful states of consciousness: interpretative elements may be present
in the mind during these events. But in the case of the depth-mystical
experience, the mind allegedly is empty of all differentiations, and it is only
after the event that mystics can interpret its significance. Thus, depth-
mystics clearly “perceive” the transcendent (i.e., have knowledge by
identity or participation), but they cannot “grasp” it like an object until the
experience is over—a transcendent reality shows itself, but what it is is only
grasped after the experience. As Teresa of Avila put it, only after her
mystical experience did she know that it was an “orison of union” with God
—during the experience itself the soul sees and understands nothing and
there are no words, but afterward the soul sees the truth clearly, not from a
vision, but from the certitude God placed there (Interior Castle V.1.9). Only
after the experience was she aware of anything; during the experience she
was not. Similarly from Jiddhu Krishnamurti: “The brain is completely
empty; all reaction had stopped; during all those hours, one was not aware
of this emptiness but only in writing it is the thing known, but this
knowledge is only descriptive and not real” (Lutyens 1983: 110–11).
     Thus, if mystics are correct, two acts occur here, unlike in sense-
perception: the depth-mystical event and a later act of conceptualization.
Only depth-mystics are in a position to know both ordinary sense-
perception and the depth-mystical experience, and they see a profound
contrast in the natures of the two. For the depth-mystical experience, the
later interpretation can be separated from the depth-experience itself. If so,
the phenomenology of the experience must be distinguished from
conceptualizations of it and beliefs about its ontic status made after the
event, and we cannot infer that the latter must be informing the former.
Believing after the fact that an experience was an experience of x does not
logically require that the concept of x was active in the experience itself.
(Any certainty that the experience itself apparently gives may also only be
an aftereffect.) But being unaware of the content at the time does not mean
there was no content. The mental structuring of sense-experience and most
mystical experiences occurs in the same state of consciousness as the
experience itself; thus, it is harder to see if there is conceptual structuring in
the experience itself. But in the case of depth-mystical experiences, one
must change one’s state of consciousness to see its significance. Thus, it is
clearer to mystics that there is a difference between the experience and its
conceptualization–, which leads to claims of ineffability. Only depth-
mystics are in the unique position to see that there is in fact an “empty”
experience.
      Also consider this from Martin Buber. From his “own unforgettable
experience,” he knew “well that there is a state in which the bonds of the
personal nature of life seem to have fallen away from us and we experience
an undivided unity” (1947: 24). But he adds:

          But I do not know—what the soul willingly imagines and indeed
          is bound to imagine (mine too once did it)—that in this I had
          attained to a union with the primal being or the godhead. That is
          an exaggeration no longer permitted to the responsible
          understanding. Responsibly—that is, as a man holding his ground
          before reality—I can elicit from those experiences only that in
          them I reached an undifferentiated unity of myself without form
          or content. … In the honest and sober account of the responsible
          understanding this unity is nothing but the unity of this soul of
          mine, whose “ground” I have reached. (ibid.: 2425)