That “responsible understanding” was implicitly dictated by his Jewish
background in which the gulf between God and creature is unbridgeable.
But this understanding only came later and did not change his sense of the
character of the experience itself in which he felt an “undivided unity” that
he initially interpreted to be with the Godhead. His religious beliefs may
have controlled his understanding but not the felt content of the experience
itself.
      If this is so, depth-mystical knowledge-claims are “based on
experiences,” but there is both a direct, nonpropositional awareness and
something inferred (the interpretation of the nature of what is experienced),
each with its own epistemic status. This is not to suggest that there is such a
thing as an “ineffable insight”—we must know what the alleged insight is,
and thus an insight must be statable. That is, the alleged insights are always
conceptually structured, even if depth-mystical experiences are not. But the
insight is a postexperience product of two components: the depth-mystical
experience and particular doctrines. Mystical “emptying,” “unknowing,” or
“forgetting” still remains a process of deconditioning consciousness, not
reconditioning it with other concepts. And even if the experience is free of
any conceptualizations, it can still be a fresh awareness with cognitive
import if some reality is in fact involved.
      Nonconstructivists can also point out that the content of mystical
experiences often comes as a surprise or even a shock to trained mystics—
the expectations shaped by their teaching do not control the experience. To
Thomas Merton, the experience is a “flat contradiction of all the soul
imagined of God” (2003: 75). This is not what would be expected if their
doctrines controlled the content of the experience but instead strongly
indicates their lack of control.23 Nor can the idea that mystical experiences
are only an intense emotional feeling of doctrines be at all applicable. So
too, the young may have no words for their mystical experiences and only
learn them later (Barnard 1997). Similarly, some extrovertive and
introvertive mystical experiences occur spontaneously to people with no
mystical training or no religious background. This often stuns and confuses
the experiencers—they have entered territory that they did not know
existed. They may have no words to describe the novel event and may use
familiar terms from their culture simply because they have no others, but
there is no reason other than mere fiat to believe those terms permeated
their initial experience. This unexpected event can radically alter the
experiencers’ worldview, expanding their sense of what is real. It can also
alter their values and can lead the nonreligious to adopt a religious way of
life. Simone Weil is an example: she was an agnostic Marxist from a Jewish
family who resisted the mystical experiences she was having but ended up
converting to Christianity. The experiences occurred despite her Marxist
beliefs, and those beliefs did not control her understanding or evaluation of
the experiences.
      The fact that mystics are sometimes heretical is also important.
Visionaries, on the other hand, are more rarely heretical. Constructivists
cannot handle heresy easily. For example, some of Meister Eckhart’s
teachings were declared to be tainted by the “stain of heresy” or to be “evil
sounding and very rash and suspect of heresy.” Even if his teachings can
now be interpreted to be orthodox, it is still very hard to claim that the
orthodox doctrines of his time controlled his teachings. His disciples, such
as Johannes Tauler and Heinrich Suso, were more orthodox in their
writings.
      Moreover, the heavy-handed interpretations that Shankara gives
Upanishadic passages and the imaginative “mystical interpretations” that
Eckhart gives biblical passages suggest that it is more likely that mystics
interpret their tradition’s authoritative revealed texts to fit what they have
experienced rather than vice versa. Eckhart had no problem finding biblical
passages he could interpret symbolically to illustrate his claims, but this
does not mean that he got those positions from the Bible. Shankara had to
interpret Upanishadic passages that conflicted with his nondualism as being
only of “indirect meaning” to lead the listeners toward the truth, while those
that supported his system were seen of “direct meaning.” In short, Shankara
justified his system with the supposedly revealed Upanishads, but he
interpreted the Upanishads to fit his system. This suggests that his own
mystical system was his ultimate source of justification, not the Vedas, and
his system was informed by mystical experiences. (He also had to give
strained interpretations to the Brahma-sutras and the Bhagavad-gita to try
to make them fit his system, including amending the former text.) That
Vedantins of a non-Advaita stripe, such as Ramanuja and the dualist
Madhva, interpret the same passages differently further suggests that the
revealed texts are not controlling their positions.
      Thus, mystical experiences may radically modify mystics’ own
understanding of their tradition’s doctrines: mystics may use the same
language and doctrines as before but now mean quite different things (as
discussed in chapter 6). Even mystics who are conservative and trying to
conform their understanding to orthodoxy thus may end up challenging the
established understanding.24 This in turn may also lead to modifying or
transforming the tradition’s orthodox doctrines for all followers, as
Hasidism did. As Gershom Scholem says, “the mystic speaks the language
of tradition, but at the same time deeply transforms it, giving old terms a
new meaning and producing new ones characterized by their strange quality
and by their emotional appeal” (1967: 9). There is a “dialectic” relation
between the mystic and the tradition (ibid.: 13). Mystical traditions of one
religion may also influence other religions’, as Jewish mysticism influenced
early Sufism (which in turn later influenced medieval Kabbalists).