Resolving Paradoxes
Some mystical paradoxes result from using different senses of the same
word in both their affirmative and denial halves and so can be paraphrased
consistently. For example, “knowing without knowing” can be unpacked as
“experiencing a transcendent reality without being able to conceptualize or
‘grasp’ it after the experience.” So too, when Meister Eckhart said “no man
can see God except he be blind, nor know him except through ignorance,”
he is talking about mystically experiencing a transcendent reality by first
“unknowing” sense-experience and worldly phenomena (see 2009: 140–
41). Through such emptying, one attains the “inner desert” or “darkness”
where God shines (ibid.; McGinn 2001: 153). Or when he said “Let us pray
to God that we may be free of God” (2009: 422), he meant that God existed
but he wanted to be free of even the idea of “God” so that he could be
empty of all “images,” and thus let the inward “birth of the son” occur.
Thus, one is full in one sense and empty in another: to be empty of all
created things is to be full of God, and to be full of all created things is to be
empty of God (Eckhart 1981: 288). The recurring plenum/vacuum paradox
can be treated similarly: the source of the world’s being is empty of
differentiated phenomena but full of beingness—the source is empty in one
respect and full in another.20 The role of different senses can be seen in the
matter of depth: God is present everywhere (in the depth of beingness) and
nowhere (in the diverse surface phenomena). It is like a common light
source being present in all of the colored spectrum: red is not blue, but their
substance is identical in being from the same source. To imagine
transcendent realities as the same in nature as phenomenal objects (as
philosophers routinely do) would make this paradox unresolvable—we
would end up with a bizarre nonmystical pantheism in which each object is
identical to every other one. But beingness is not a matter of identity on the
“surface” phenomena of the world: here objects remain differentiated. In
Eckhart’s words, objects are distinct in their “creaturehood,” but they are
the same in their “is-ness” (istigkeit). So too, he can paradoxically refer to
creatures as “pure nothing”: they all exist, but their being comes only from
God, and thus in themselves they are ontologically nothing. The same
occurs with respect to the nature of transcendent realities. Thus, theistic
mystics may deny that God exists in the way that phenomena exist and yet
not want to deny that God exists at all, and so they may say “God both
exists and does not exist” or “God is both real and unreal” when they mean
only that the mode of existence of a transcendent reality is different from
that of phenomenal objects.
      In short, such paradoxes can be restated consistently and so are not
evidence of inherent irrationality in mystics’ thinking.21 But many
commentators have no problems accepting, for example, the Prajnaparamita
paradoxes noted above, and in fact embrace the idea that these texts were
not meant to be understood by “ordinary logic.” Edward Conze can say that
a passage in the Heart Sutra propounds “just plain nonsense” (2001: 88)
and that the Diamond-Cutter Sutra “has left the conventions of logic far
behind” (1978: 19). Thich Nhat Hanh translates a passage from the
Diamond-Cutter Sutra as “What are called ‘all dharmas’ are, in fact not ‘all
dharmas.’ That is why they are called ‘all dharmas’ ” (2010: 21), and he
later states “When we look at A and see that A is not A, we know that A is
truly A” (ibid.: 118). Conze too thinks the laws of logic are violated in the
Heart Sutra: “ ‘A is what A is not,’ or ‘what A is not, that is A’ ” (2001:
90). If this were the case, then the texts would indeed make no sense.
Conze’s overall assessment is that the Perfection of Wisdom “had resorted
to the enunciation of plain contradictions as a means of expressing the
inexpressible” (1967: 141), and “In a bold and direct manner the
Prajnāpāramitā Sūtras explicitly proclaim the identity of contradictory
opposites, and they make no attempt to mitigate their paradoxes” (1953:
126).
      But is Prajnaparamita thought in fact consistent? It is one thing to say
that writers intentionally use paradox as a rhetorical device or for
soteriological purposes (i.e., to free unenlightened minds of concepts), but
as long as the content can be explained or the texts can be paraphrased
without contradictions, the texts are rational.22 It is another thing to say that
these writers intended nonsense (see Sangharakshita 1993: 24). Is the
Diamond-Cutter Sutra really just simply meant to be chanted for esoteric
reasons and never meant to have an intelligible message? In fact, it is fairly
easy to render intelligible the contradictions presented above by
paraphrasing and explaining them. The central point is that the factors of
the experienced world (dharmas) do exist as parts of the phenomenal world
but are not “real” only in one particular metaphysical sense: they do not
exist by their own power or have some unchangeable intrinsic nature
(svabhava) that separates each from other things, as the untutored mind
normally supposes. It is then no mystery that the texts state both that there
are dharmas but that they do not “exist” in the sense of existing through
their own self-existence. All that is meant is the readily intelligible claim
that there are dharmas in the world, but they all depend on other
phenomena and thus do not exist separately and permanently. There is
nothing paradoxical about the factual content of the claim, even if the form
—“there are dharmas, but there are no dharmas”—is contradictory: there
are dharmas in one sense (as dependently arisen parts of the world) but not
in another (as self-existent entities). So too with the claim “The practice of
the Perfection of Wisdom is a nonpractice”: there is a bodhisattva practice,
but nothing about it is self-existent and thus it is not “real.” And so too with
the basic bodhisattva paradox: there are no self-existent beings, but there is
something there (impermanent configurations of “persons”) to point toward
nirvana (which also is not self-existent). To generalize: there are things in
the world, but they are free of any self-existence. Thus, the actual claims
stated in paradoxical forms are resolvable consistently and intelligibly. The
same with the apparent paradoxes resulting from the Buddhist “two truths”
strategy when the conventional point of view is combined with the point of
view of highest purposes: conventionally, there are impermanent
configurations that can be labeled “houses” and “trees,” but from the
ultimately correct ontic point of view there are no such self-existent units
and thus such entities are not real.
      Thus, the Prajnaparamita paradoxes resolve in a manner similar to that
of the theistic paradoxes: the affirmative phrase and the denial phrases of a
paradox involve different subjects or different senses of what is referred to.
Here, there are dharmas, but they do not have any self-existence and so do
not “exist” from the point of view of highest matters, since they are not
permanent and independent—thus, they are first affirmed as part of the
experienced world and then denied as self-existent. But these statements
can be restated consistently: “There is no real, self-existent ‘I’ (or dharma,
teaching, beings, and so on), but the conventional term is still useful for
denoting fairly coherent but constantly changing parts in the flow of
phenomena.” The “paradoxes” result from juxtaposing two senses of, for
example, “a being”: beings in the ordinary sense that the mirror theory
requires do not exist, but there is still some reality there. There is no
separate and enduring entity to lead to nirvana, but the reality underlying
the “illusion” of a self-existent entity is still there. In sum, things do exist
but not in the way we normally imagine.
      Some mystical claims appear paradoxical due merely to
misunderstanding what the writer intended. Nagarjuna’s claim that “All
statements are empty” (shunya) is often taken to mean that all statements
are empty of any intellectual content, and thus paradoxically “it is not
reasonable to take any statement seriously—including the one that states
that all statements are empty” (Biderman & Scharfstein 1989: x)—or that
“the ultimate truth is that there is no ultimate truth” or that he was
profoundly skeptical about our ability to arrive at the ultimate truth about
reality (Siderits 1989: 213, 247). In short, no statements are true. However,
Nagarjuna never said anything of the sort. In saying statements are empty,
he said only that they are not ontologically self-existent (svabhava),
certainly not that they are empty of intellectual content or meaning. His
claim is that statements, like all phenomena in the world, could not function
if they existed self-existently (e.g., they would be permanent and never
arise), not that they are meaningless. In fact, he addresses this objection in
his Overturning the Objections (Vigrahavyavartani).
     Jay Garfield and Graham Priest apply dialetheist ideas to Nagarjuna
(2003), but they can do so only by making up statements in their “rational
reconstruction” of Nagarjuna’s thought that he never made: “There are no
ultimate truths, and it is ultimately true that everything is empty,” “Things
have no nature, and that is their nature,” and “There are no ultimate truths,
and that is one.” Nagarjuna instead said things that were consistent—to
make up statements as they did: “There are ultimate truths, e.g., all things
are dependently arisen and empty of anything self-existent,” and “The
nature of things is that they have no self-existence.” To claim as they do
that “Things have an intrinsic nature of having no intrinsic nature” would
be to distort the nature of Nagarjuna’s arguments: to him only things that
are self-existent have an “intrinsic nature” (svabhava), and so dependently
arisen things can have no intrinsic nature. Garfield and Priest needlessly
make a clear point paradoxical by combining two senses of “nature”: it is
the nature (in the ordinary, nontechnical sense) of all phenomena that they
are empty of anything—any “intrinsic nature” (svabhava)—that would give
them self-existence. What Nagarjuna actually said is consistent (the “four
options” is dealt with below). In short, Garfield and Priest are introducing
paradoxes into Nagarjuna’s thought where there are none. And as they have
to admit, later Madhyamikas do not help their case: Chandrakirti explicitly
said never to accept contradictions, and they could not point to any Indian
Buddhist commentators who accepted their alleged paradoxes (Deguchi,
Garfield, & Priest 2013: 429). They also assert that such Tibetan
commentators as Tsongkhapa explicitly worked to defuse apparent
contradictions and that the Buddhist logicians Dignaga and Dharmakirti
explicitly endorsed the law of noncontradiction. Chandrakirti wrote that
there should be no debating with one who persists in maintaining a
contradiction when confronted with it because there is no debating with
someone who is out of their mind (unmattaka) (Clearly-Worded
Commentary 15.10).
     Sometimes translations create paradoxes where there are none.
Consider Thich Nhat Hanh’s translation of part of the Diamond-Cutter
Sutra: “What are called ‘all dharmas’ are, in fact, not ‘all dharmas.’ That is
why they are called ‘all dharmas’ ” (2010: 21). The last sentence makes the
claim sound absurd. And a phrase with that structure appears often in the
Perfection of Wisdom in 8,000 Lines and has been translated in that way by
many. But the proper translation of one Sanskrit word dissolves any
paradox. For example: “The Buddha has taught that the factors specific to
buddhas are not in fact (self-existent) factors of buddhas. In this sense
(tena), the factors specific to the buddhas are spoken of.” Tena means “by
this” or “in this way,” and to translate it as “that is why …” only needlessly
introduces a paradox. Thus, unless one is committed to requiring the
Diamond-Cutter Sutra to be paradoxical, the last line can be translated
nonparadoxically to mean simply “Thus is the case with the factors” or
“That is how we treat the factors of a buddha.” The actual point that there
are no “real” (i.e., self-existent) factors of a buddha can come through the
translation clearly without absurdities.
      We certainly do not have to conclude that the Diamond-Cutter Sutra is
meant to be an unintelligible and meaningless mantra only to be chanted
and not to be understood (although its popularity may be in that regard).
And the same is true of the other Perfection of Wisdom texts. Nor do we
have to endorse Bhikshu Sangharakshita’s conclusion concerning the
Collection of the Highest Qualities: “if it resists our attempts to make sense
of it, if it refuses to be contained by our intellectual expectations, this is
because it is not supposed to be useful to us in any way that we can
understand” (1993: 24). He claims that perhaps the text only seems
confusing because “we are locked into linguistic … conventions which
require the text to offer itself in one specific sequence,” but “if we insist
that the requirements of the logical mind be satisfied, we are missing the
point” and if the text “were all set forth neatly and clearly, leaving no loose
ends, we might be in danger of thinking we had grasped the Perfection of
Wisdom” (ibid.: 44). But there is no need to argue that these texts are using
paradox to convey an underlying irrationality of mystical insights. The
Perfection of Wisdom’s message can be stated simply and consistently: all
things are impermanent and dependent on other things; there is nothing self-
existent in the world; and bodhisattvas try to guide the impermanent chains
of dependent factors that we conventionally label “persons” toward the final
rest that we conventionally call “nirvana.” No special experiences, mystical
or other, are needed to see the rationality of the actual claims or to
understand them.
      Many alleged paradoxes arise from mixing points of view in this way
and can be restated free of contradiction by indicating the differences in the
affirmative and denial halves of the paradox. Implicitly accepting the mirror
theory of language while knowing that language does not really mirror
reality may be behind many paradoxes. Mystics do accept that some terms
reflect the experienced reality as it is (“real,” “one,” “immutable”), but they
also see the problem of the possible misunderstanding and distortion by the
unenlightened, and so they immediately deny the applicability of the terms,
resulting in a paradox. But the content of the paradox can be restated
without paradox if the mirror theory is rejected—i.e., the denial half is not
actually needed. A theistic mystic may say “God neither exists nor does not
exist” when what is meant is that God neither exists in the manner
phenomenal objects do nor does not absolutely not exist; in short, God
exists but his mode of existing differs from that of anything else.
      Shankara’s explanation of negation can also be explained by the mirror
theory. Paradoxes result from superimposing attributes upon Brahman that
are known to be false so that no one believes that Brahman does not exist,
but these attributes must then be negated to show that they in fact do not
apply to what is not an object (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.3.9). The mirror
theory also accounts for his paradox that the world neither exists nor does
not exist but has an indefinable or inexpressible (anirvachaniya) status:
anything describing the status of the world that is not self-contradictory
would indicate that it is real—which it is not since it does not meet the
criterion of being permanent and unchanging—and so it must be denied,
leaving its status inexpressible. If the mirror theory is rejected, Advaitins
can consistently affirm that the world exists in some sense and deny it is
either real (sat) in the way that Brahman alone is real (permanent and
unchanging) or totally unreal (asat).
      Many alleged paradoxes of the transcendent are simply conflicts with
everyday ideas, which is only to be expected if transcendent realities are
ontologically “wholly other.” Some claims appear paradoxical until they are
explained, because they conflict with our currently accepted beliefs or have
a conclusion that does not seem to follow from accepted premises. But if a
claim can be explained in terms of analogies from the natural world (e.g.,
how a dreamer both is immanent to everything in the dream and yet
transcends it), the apparent paradox disappears. But many religious people
are not bothered by the contradictions in their theology. In fact, Christians
have no qualms about “mysteries”—thus, they can affirm one claim (“Jesus
is entirely human”) and turn around and immediately affirm the opposite
(“Jesus is entirely God”) without blinking. Many Christians affirm both our
freedom of will (so that we, and not God, are responsible for sin) and that
God absolutely controls every event (so whatever happens is ordained by
God) without being bothered by the blatant contradiction. Indeed, many
theists believe things of God precisely because they are impossible—if the
claims made sense, they would not need faith. They may accept that
“human reason” cannot resolve the mysteries and simply accept the
cognitive dissonance. To quote Tertullian’s famous dicta: “It is to be
believed because it is absurd (ineptum),” “It is certain because it is
impossible,” and “I believe because it is impossible.” These paradoxes
result from conflicting religious doctrines—rather than paradoxes resulting
from trying to express the experience of a transcendent reality in worldly
terms—and may not be resolvable.
     At least in mysticism, the paradoxes result from alleged encounters
with reality and thus are more directly experientially based than general
theological thought is. But the question here is whether mystical
experiences necessarily require paradox. A genuine paradox results when a
statement refers to one subject in a contradictory manner. It would not be
resolvable into a consistent set of statements. But the apparent mystical
paradoxes I know of can be paraphrased without a contradiction and
without the loss of any of their assertive content because their affirmation
and denial do not end up making conflicting claims. (This is not to say that
mystics, any more than the rest of us, are always consistent—they may say
one thing in one part of their writings that contradicts something elsewhere.
The intentional contradictions of paradox are something else.) Each
paradox must be examined in its context to determine if its apparent internal
conflict can be defused. But that there are apparent paradoxes is not too
surprising if a mystic does not see how the paradoxicality arises from an
implicit theory of language. So too, mystics may often intentionally use
paradoxes as soteriological tools for their shock value to emphasize both the
otherness of transcendent realities or phenomenal reality free of conceptual
boxes, and our inability to understand with the analytical mind what is
experienced. (However, employing paradox is not an effective tool when
people think the mystics are simply speaking gibberish.) Paraphrasing may
also eliminate the soteriological value of paradox by removing its shock
value.
      The soteriological effect of paradox may explain the Prajnaparamita
writers’ seeming delight in employing paradoxes. Zen koans can also be
seen as soteriological in intent. These are mental puzzles, utilized in a form
of analytical meditation, designed to force a disciple to see that concepts
control our mental life and to attain a sudden breakthrough into our true
selfless nature, free of the grip of thinking and experiencing through
concepts. Koans are deliberately absurd and some involve paradoxes. They
sound like meaningful sentences—“What is the sound of one hand
clapping?”—but by contemplating them the disciple eventually sees that
they are like the grammatically correct but absurd claim “She is a married
bachelor” and eventually sees that there are no “real” (permanent,
independent) objects for language to refer to.