The Limitation of Any Mystical Claim to Knowledge
If transcendent realities are truly unknowable, then mystics would not even
know they exist—we may make a metaphysical posit, but nothing
experiential would be involved. But mystics are certain that they have
experienced some fundamental reality: they are aware of a reality and are
not merely advancing theological posits. Nor do they infer the reality
allegedly experienced: in “knowledge by participation,” transcendent
realities are directly known in that sense. Nevertheless, while the experience
of a transcendent reality may be direct (i.e., unmediated) and not inferred,
the understanding of what is experienced is not—that is a matter of
interpretation. In particular, the depth-mystical experience is empty of
everything but a sense of a nondual consciousness; it is not possible to
deduce in a simple way any highly-ramified concepts from it. More
generally, the articulated knowledge-claims of mystical ways of life are
only indirectly inferred. To give another example: Buddhists claim that
enlightenment is the end of the cycle of rebirths, but do they experience
merely the end of desires and infer the end of rebirths based on the theory
that the cycle of rebirths is driven by desires grounded in root-ignorance?
Buddhists may invoke reincarnation experiences and accept that this is an
empirical basis for the claim that we survive death, but how could Buddhist
contemplatives know on the basis of such experiences alone that they “have
experientially probed the origins and evolution of the universe back to its
divine source” (Wallace 2009: 195)? Why do mystics in the West speak of
ending desires but say nothing of ending a cycle of rebirths? It is easy to
understand that mystics would not normally see a difference between the
experience and the interpretation imposed onto it, but the difference
remains.
      Thus, even if we grant that mystics are in touch with a transcendent
reality, the experiences still may give no more than a general awareness of
that reality. One may ask how one can know something exists without
knowing at least some attributes. However, the flexibility of interpretation
limits any claim to any specific knowledge of a transcendent reality.
Mystics may know that something fundamental exists that makes our
ordinary world seem less real, but what it is, beyond being “real,” “one,”
“immutable,” or “beingness,” is not given but instead is open to different
interpretations outside the introvertive mystical states of consciousness.16
As Thomas Merton puts it, one knows (i.e., has the experience of a
transcendent reality) without knowing what one knows (2003: 60). No
doctrine is given beyond being an experience of a profound reality or at best
a general source of the self or of all phenomenal reality. Mystics too are left
with mystery. Mystics in dualistic states of consciousness can remember
that the depth-mystical experience is free of any sense of a surface-level
ego and is filled with another reality, but the full nature of that reality is not
given in the experience. As noted in the last chapter, an “ineffable insight”
is a contradiction in terms (contra Kukla 2005): the awareness of a
transcendent reality may be free of conceptions, but part of any
postexperience insight must be statable to claim that something is known. A
mystic cannot say “I have no idea what I experienced, but now I believe x
because of it.” The minimum properties are statable (real, one, immutable),
but what is the complete concrete insight? What exactly is the knowledge
gained? A mystical theory based only on a core of descriptions common to
all major mystical doctrines would at best be very minimal indeed and
would not satisfy any classical mystics. Any full characterization of what is
allegedly experienced is the result of a mixture of the experienced sense
with elements supplied by a mystic’s tradition’s theory.
     But this greatly limits the extent of any specific “mystical knowledge.”
The experience has less cognitive content than mystics realize: even if the
content is not totally ineffable, knowledge-claims are not determined by the
experience itself. Consider the most basic questions: Is what is experienced
the source of something phenomenal? If so, is it the source of all objective
natural phenomena, or just the ground of consciousness or of the self? Is it
nonpersonal, or do depth-mystics only experience the nonpersonal
beingness of a personal reality? Is God the source of a nonpersonal
beingness, or vice versa? Does consciousness underlie matter? Must there
be one source to everything, or are matter and consciousness separate as in
Samkhya? Ralph Hood (2002) argues that from phenomenology alone the
depth-mystical experience involves a transcendent self—but is the
transcendent self the separate individual self of Samkhya or the universal
self of Advaita? Are there no individual selves or multiple ones? Is the
experience just an intense awareness of the natural ground of the self or the
of beingness of the world with no further ontic significance? Is the natural
world a distinct reality in its own right, or, on the other extreme, is
something transcendent the only reality? Is the transcendent source moral or
morally indifferent? Does the sense of bliss in a mystical experience come
from experiencing the infusion of a loving and benevolent reality, from a
more neutral sense that everything is all right as is, from freedom from a
sense of ego, or simply from the mind being undisturbed when it is empty
of all intentional content? Does the fact that mystics may become more
compassionate and loving indicate that they are in contact with a loving
transcendent reality, or does it only indicate that they have ended all sense
of self-importance and self-centeredness and do not feel alienated from the
rest of the world? Do mystics only project a natural human feeling of love
from themselves that results from the joy and selflessness they feel?
     As discussed above, only outside the introvertive mystical mental
states are mystics able to decide what sort of insight the experience is, and
what is experienced is then one mental object among many even for
mystics. But this means that mystics in the end are in the same epistemic
situation as nonmystics when it comes to the nature of what was
experienced, even though they have a larger experiential base from which to
make their decisions about what is real. This problem occurs whether the
mystic is enlightened or not and regardless of how mindful his or her
consciousness is. This also raises the question of whether the mystics
themselves after introvertive mystical experiences have a memory of a
transcendent reality “as it really is.” Mystics such as Meister Eckhart say
that transcendent realities cannot be “grasped by the mind”—or as the
Pseudo-Dionysius says, that God is unknown even to those who have
experienced him except in the moment of experience. This can lead to the
position that such realities are not “knowable” since any statable
knowledge-claim seems to make them into objects. But because
transcendent realities cannot be known as objects distinct from the
experiencer does not mean that they are not experiencable (contra Turner
1995).
     This in turn leads to the issue raised earlier of whether any mystical
theory with its theory-laden, highly ramified concepts actually “captures”
the reality experienced, since there will always be a human-generated,
nonexperiential element to any knowledge-claim. One of the possible
interpretations may in fact be the best that is humanly possible, but in the
absence of neutral criteria for adjudication, the presence of conflicting
interpretations that have stood the test of time will remain a barrier to our
knowing which one it is.17 The experiences themselves will not supply the
answer. In our situation, all we can do is test whether each system is
internally coherent and able to explain all the available phenomenological
data. Introducing nonmystical considerations only leads to new disputes.
Even if a consensus develops over time for one existing interpretation
concerning what exactly is experienced in each type of introvertive
experience or a new religious option arises in the future, how can we be
sure it reflects what is real? Consensus does not mandate truth—after all,
before Copernicus, there was a consensus in Europe concerning a Ptolemaic
cosmology for over a thousand years. Here we have no way empirically to
test the claims about transcendent realities. It may be that no set of
doctrines is any better than any other with regard to transcendent realities—
all are only our all-too-human attempts to comprehend what is beyond our
ken.
      At a minimum, this means that an appeal to more than the experiences
themselves will always need to be made to justify any mystical knowledge-
claim. As noted in the last chapter, religious and philosophical ideas from
the mystic’s tradition thus will always play a necessary role both in how the
mystical experience is construed and in the justifications of claims. Theists
normally treat revelations and other numinous experiences as more
fundamental in interpreting the significance of mystical experiences.
Nontheists will offer their reasons for their positions. But in all cases,
factors outside the experiences themselves remain a necessary part of the
picture and will need their own separate justifications.
      Mystics may insist that only they know reality’s true nature or that the
proof of their claims lies within their own hearts and that their experiences
confirm their beliefs. Nevertheless, the problem again is the competing
answers to all the basic questions noted above: mystics cannot get around
the fact that other mystics who apparently have had experiences of the same
nature support conflicting views and have the same personal conviction of
their claims being “self-evident” or “self-confirming.” Even if a mystic is
certain that he or she has experienced a transcendent reality, this certainty
cannot be shifted to certainty about his or her theory. Thus, a mystic cannot
say “Just meditate—you will see that ours is the true knowledge” when
making claims about the nature of what is experienced, since equally
qualified mystics are making conflicting interpretations. The criteria to
verify a mystical cognitive claim are not internal to it: any such internalist
account fails in the face of equally well grounded competing claims. The
certitude and finality that mystics feel from the experience is transferred to
a version of their tradition’s beliefs, but this does not mean that their
interpretation is necessarily true or part of the experience itself. Mystical
claims are about the nature of the reality experienced, and no mystical
experience can guarantee the insight it allegedly provides about that—there
are no “self-confirming,” “self-authenticating,” or “self-verifying” doctrines
about the nature of what is experienced, no matter how powerful the
experiences giving rise to the doctrine are. In short, the conflicting
interpretations preclude there being any experience-based claim to certainty
about a particular tradition’s doctrines. Even accepting that the experience
leads to an insight rather than a delusion requires a decision that the
experience itself cannot determine. As noted earlier, experiences of internal
states of the mind may be self-authenticating (e.g., the immediate, direct
knowledge of having a headache or having a memory) and thus in need of
no further justification or confirmation, but any ontic claims beyond those
for the psychological state itself (e.g., the cause of a headache or whether a
memory is correct) are in need of further justifications. Claims about
introvertive mystical experiences cannot fall into the “self-authenticating”
category when its ontic significance is open to such diverse interpretations
even if one is correct.
      Transcendent realities become intentional objects for the mystics
themselves after the mystical experience when what was experienced is
present to the dualistic mind, and the mind attaches a name to the event and
stores it in memory. Thus, the memory of the experience differs in basic
nature from the experience itself: what was experienced becomes an object
of thought, and the memory necessarily involves a conceptualization of
what was experienced. This memory is not any more self-authenticating
about what is remembered than any other memory. No claims about the
nature of the alleged reality are impervious to error or immune to challenge,
even when the “knowledge by participation” of mystical experiences is
involved. Unless strong constructivists are correct, the reality experienced
has a say in such metaphysical matters by adding to the pool of experiences
about which mystics make their doctrines, but what is experienced
nevertheless does not determine one doctrine or one more general
worldview over another. The interpretation and validation of the experience
remain philosophical issues after the introvertive experiences are over, even
for the mystics themselves.
      In sum, there is a gap between experience and doctrine—between any
experiential claim and any ontic claim about the reality experienced—that
cannot be bridged even by the participatory knowledge of mystical
experiences. No mystical experience carries its own interpretation. These
experiences radically underdetermine different mystics’ metaphysics. Even
if phenomenologists can abstract some common, universal “thin” core to
each type of mystical experience on which all the experiencers could
concur, this will not solve the problem: any minimalist descriptive account
of the experience itself is free of reference to what is experienced and thus
obviously cannot resolve the problem of which of the diverse “thick”
interpretations of the nature of the reality experienced is best. No account
with highly ramified concepts from any tradition of the nature of what is
experienced can be said to be given in the experience itself. By bracketing
the question of the nature of what is experienced, phenomenological
accounts rule themselves out as being adjudicators of all such ontological
claims.
      Nor is there any philosophical or religious point of view that is neutral
to the competing systems. Meditative techniques are doctrinally neutral.
There is no agreed-on nonempirical set of criteria for adjudicating between
competing interpretations, and nothing in history suggests that all theists
and nontheists will ever agree on one. Even conceiving such a common
ground is difficult. And even if such a set of criteria were agreed on, the
application of the criteria would nevertheless turn on the competing
underlying metaphysics from different traditions—i.e., theological or other
metaphysical beliefs would determine how any neutral criteria are applied.
Consider criteria often advanced in philosophy for the acceptability of
scientific theories: empirical accuracy, ontic and mathematical simplicity,
internal consistency, systematic organization, coherence with other accepted
theories, scope, fruitfulness for new research and theories, familiarity, and
the intuitive plausibility of the most basic elements of the theoretical
framework. Some of these might be applicable to the mystical disputes, but
with their broader metaphysical concerns (rather than empirically checkable
claims), utilizing them would be harder to do. For example, all mystical
systems claim to be of the same scope—comprehending all aspects of
reality—even if not all traditions treat the same aspects as fundamentally
real. Or consider simplicity: all will agree that Advaita is committed to the
fewest number of ontologically irreducible elements—one—but this would
not satisfy theists and others as adequate to the complexity of reality.
Coherence with other religious and nonreligious beliefs is important, as the
Martin Buber example noted in the last chapter attests, but this shifts the
problem to justifying those other beliefs. (Also see Jones 1993: 41–46.)
          Can Mystical Knowledge-Claims Be Compared?
Three presuppositions for this discussion are that mystical claims from
different traditions can be compared, that they genuinely conflict, and that
all mystics are in the same boat epistemically. Consider the first issue first.
      Unless experiences can be compared in some way as potential sources
of knowledge, they cannot be ranked. And unless mystical knowledge-
claims are in some way about the same subject, they cannot agree or
conflict. Constructivists argue not only that each mystical experience is
unique (because of the unique structuring each experiencer brings to his or
her experience), but also that each experience is unique in type—there is no
meaningful cross-cultural commonality between them that would enable us
to group them in different categories of “mystical experiences.” Context
determines all elements of the experiences. This would preclude any
ranking of types of mystical experiences since there are no types.18
      Postmodernists in general deny a second type of comparison: between
knowledge-claims from different cultural traditions. They go from the lack
of any rock-solid foundations of knowledge to a thorough relativism of
knowledge-claims, concepts, rationality, and justifications. They believe
that cultural “webs of belief” determine what is accepted as “truth” or
“knowledge” within a community. All justifications and reasoning are
governed by standards internal to different cultures: there is no common
language, conceptual framework, or set of norms of rationality that would
permit measuring different cultural claims against each other. There can be
no appeal to reasons or evidence across cultural lines, and so no cross-
cultural comparisons are possible. Nor is any neutral standard transcending
all cultures possible. Thus, no agreement or conflict of knowledge-claims is
possible. In the end, the world drops out of the picture for adjudicating
disputes, and we are left with only a collection of incommensurable views,
some of which are useful for particular tasks and some not.
      Postmodernism is influential in the humanities and the social sciences,
but surprisingly not in the area from which it arose: philosophy. If nothing
else, its basic claims end up being incoherent—e.g., the claim “there are no
universally true knowledge-claims” is itself presented as a universally true
knowledge-claim (see Jones 2009: chap. 3). Here, different types of
mystical experiences do appear from cross-cultural study to be groupable
into useful categories, and claims made about the experiences within those
categories appear comparable. And there is no reason to rule out any such
typology on the grounds that cross-cultural comparisons must be
impossible: different terms in different cultures may be incommensurable,
as with Ptolemy and Copernicus on what the term “sun” means, but this
does not mean that they cannot be referring to the same reality. So too, we
can use more abstract categories to group mystical terms from different
cultures for comparison that would be acceptable to all, just as Ptolemy and
Copernicus could agree that their term “the sun” refers to the same
“celestial orb” even if they disagreed on its nature. Differences in
interpretations do not mean that depth-mystics do not experience the same
reality. So too, the introvertive theistic experiences must involve the same
reality if they are veridical—or at least it is hard not to assume that there
can be only one creator or only one sustainer god. In addition, extrovertive
experiences involve the phenomenal world, and if they involve a sense of a
transcendent source, that source is either one theistic god or one
nonpersonal reality.
      Thus, if any reality is involved in any of the types of mystical
experiences, it is reasonable to assume that the same reality is involved in
all the experiences of that category. Claims are also made of the same scope
for each category—about the nature of the world, the self, or alleged
transcendent realities. The presence of conceptualizations in knowledge-
claims about transcendent realities does not require multiple referents, nor
does it rule out that the claims may express insights any more than the role
of concepts in scientific knowledge-claims rules out genuine knowledge in
that field. The experiences themselves provide the commonality needed to
make the claims within each category comparable cross-culturally,
somewhat like the causal theory of reference would permit the comparison
of competing theories in science. What is experienced cannot be presented
for public viewing, but the experience itself is a “dubbing event”—i.e.,
whatever caused the experience in one person caused it in others even if
interpretations differ radically. (The analogy breaks down if mystical
experiences are not the product of a causal relation.) “Sense” and
“reference” can therefore be distinguished here.