Understanding the Paradoxical
Resolving paradoxes into consistent claims would be open to the charge of
imposing logic onto what is illogical only if the paradoxes are in fact
genuine. Some mystical paradoxes may be recalcitrant to explanations and
paraphrasing because the context of the paradox does not make clear what
the writers had in mind.23 Or some paradoxes may remain genuine and not
merely prima facie. Rudolf Otto thought mysticism had its own “peculiar
logic” that discounted the laws of noncontradiction and the excluded middle
(1932: 64). Walter Stace thought mystical experiences were inherently
paradoxical: the paradoxes are “incapable of rational resolution,” “the laws
of logic … have no application to mystical experiences,” and mysticism is
“simply nonlogical” (1960a: 251–76, 304–5). Or it may be that we are not
able to express some things about reality consistently in any language. Why
should evolved beings with our particular brains always be able to
conceptualize all aspects of reality consistently, or why must all of reality
conform to reasoning devised for events in the everyday world? Perhaps
biologist John B. S. Haldane was correct in his suspicion that the universe is
not only stranger than we suppose but stranger than we can suppose. For
example, consider again the case of the electron: the best we can say is that
it is something that manifests itself as a wave in some experimental setups
and as a particle in others—what it is in itself we do not know. (An electron
is not paradoxically both a wave and a particle, as is often claimed, but a
reality that exhibits wavelike or particlelike behavior through the
interactions in different experimental settings [Barbour 2000: 77].) If
transcendent realities exist, perhaps they are like that: they only manifest
themselves to us as either personal or nonpersonal, active or inactive—in
themselves, they are something we do not know, as perennial philosophers
suggest.24 Perhaps transcendent realities are “beyond logic”—perhaps
logical relations are applicable only to matters of phenomena, and not to
transcendent realities or to reality in itself. More generally, such realities, if
they exist, may have to be characterized as John Locke characterized
substance: “something I know not what.”
      Even if some paradoxes are genuine, the experiences of that about
which nothing nonparadoxical can be said would remain central. Coming
up with consistent claims to believe may then not be a major concern to the
experiencers. But even if so, to speak of “believing what is self-
contradictory” is misleading: any concepts may make a transcendent reality
seem paradoxical, but the sense of paradox only comes from trying to
conceptualize what is experienced outside the awareness in dualistic
consciousness. Indeed, it is important to note that no experience is
paradoxical in itself, just as no experience is true or false—only statements
trying to depict it or explain it can be true, false, or paradoxical.25
Experiences do not conform to the canons of reason or conflict with them—
they just are. Nor do they conflict with each other—only our understanding
of them can conflict. Mystical experiences may conflict with our
expectations set up by our understanding of the world based on other
experiences. But logic applies only to our claims, not to experiences. Thus,
paradox is not a product of any experience in itself but of our use of
concepts in our search for understanding a given experience and for
creating a coherent and consistent picture for understanding all of our
experiences. Thus, we deem some experiences delusions because they do
not cohere with what the experiences we consider cognitive tell us about the
world.
      So too, no experience in itself is rational or irrational—only our
attempts to depict or understand what is experienced can be either rational
or irrational. Mystical experiences do not differ from other experiences in
this regard. The situation is comparable to the Egyptians seeing the
Euphrates: they would know what they experienced even if they could not
state it without contradictions because of the nature of their particular
language. Or recall the analogy of the drawn cube: it shows that we can
apprehend a reality even if the result of trying to “translate” the experience
into a drawing leads to the paradox of having both to affirm and to deny
some features of the drawing. We would have to say “The angles are all 90
degrees and the edges do not cross, even though in the drawing they do not
look that way.” But the drawing does not affect our experience of what is
drawn. So too, when “drawn,” what is experienced in a mystical experience
does not appear as experienced, and there is no longer a question of
believing the verbal construction. If so, mystical insights may still be
coherent even though they cannot be stated in any language without a
contradiction. Mystics would be forced into a Tertullianesque situation of
affirming what seems logically impossible while their interest remains
focused on what was experienced.
      Thus, the cube analogy shows that we can coherently apprehend a
reality even if the result of trying to translate it into language is paradoxical.
However, language is one tool that can “draw” the fact that it is a drawing
(contra early Wittgenstein and other adherents of the mirror theory). And
once this is done, we can see that reality need not mirror language. Even if
using language leads to contradictions when applied to transcendent
realities, mystics believe that what they have experienced is real. They
know that the inconsistencies are not inherent in what is experienced, but
only in our dualistic conceptualization of it. That is, mystics can see the
drawingness of their “drawings” and see that the “paradoxes” are not
genuine. But mystics also realize that the unenlightened will not see this,
and so they may still deny that language can apply. The cube analogy also
shows how mystics can still function rationally while using paradox: they
can believe in and think about transcendent realities, understand their own
claims, and make claims that reflect their experience (and reject claims that
do not) even while using language that to those without the requisite
experience seems hopelessly contradictory. They have good reasons based
in experience to speak the way they do. Thus, one can agree that the
paradoxes are intended by their speakers to be true, but nevertheless why
paradoxes are accepted can be explained in a rational manner. (This would
also be some evidence for the dialetheists’ position on contradictions, but
only if some genuine paradoxes do in fact remain in mysticism.)
      Even though reasoning alienates us from mystical receptivity by
introducing another mode of consciousness, reason is not abolished in
mystical ways of life as whole: reasoning is a part of mysticism, since after
their mystical experiences even mystics themselves need to understand the
nature of what they have experienced to align their lives with reality.
Mystical paradoxes point to the need for an experience to understand why
apparently contradictory statements are being advanced. Transcendent
mysteries resist explication in “worldly” terms and thus at least apparent
contradictions do arise in the mystics’ accounts. That the “two-
dimensional” linguistic projections of our rational mind cannot capture a
“three-dimensional” transcendent reality is only to be expected. This is true
even if the cognitive content of the paradox can be stated in
noncontradictory terms (and then denied because the language suggests to
the unenlightened that what is experienced is just another item in the
universe). But paradox is a way to point away from all of our accustomed
ways of thinking toward transcendent realities and may be a useful
soteriological device if listeners can resist thinking in terms of phenomenal
objects.
      In sum, the use of paradoxes does not mean that mystics are inherently
irrational.