The Neutrality of Science
In sum, merely identifying the bases in the body that permit mystical
experiences will not determine whether the experiences are insights, and so
it does not provide a stronger empirical case for either side of this
philosophical dispute.35 Granted, if it turns out that people who have
mystical experiences all have brain lesions or otherwise have defective or
damaged brains or suffer from other pathologies, then the naturalists’
approach becomes a compelling argument that no mystical insight is
involved, even if no one particular natural explanation has yet gained a
consensus. It is hard to argue that a physically damaged brain can gain a
new insight into reality that a healthy brain misses—that God, as it were,
only discloses himself to people with defective brains. Despite William
James’s argument concerning fever (1958: 30), it would be hard to imagine
a severely damaged brain as a vehicle for insights into a reality. Thus, if a
damaged brain produces these experiences, we should conclude that they
are in all likelihood delusory. If, however, these experiences are common
among people who are free of pathological conditions and have perfectly
healthy brains, this argument fails. And there is no evidence that mystical
experiences occur only to people with physiological damage. Instead, there
is empirical evidence that mystical experiences are widespread among
normal persons (Hardy 1983; Hay 1994; Hood 2006).36
      Thus, the bottom line is that science cannot answer whether a mystical
experience is a purely natural phenomenon. As discussed, merely
establishing the nexus in the brain of the event and the neural circuits
involved or finding some trigger that causes mystical experiences in a
certain percentage of subjects is irrelevant to the issue of whether the
stimulated area of the brain permits a mystical experience of a transcendent
reality to occur or whether the experience is no more than an internal
function of that mundane brain activity. It is not merely a matter of our
current incomplete knowledge of the brain: even a complete mapping of the
brain’s mechanisms will not enable us to address the philosophical issues.
Finding a trigger may make the experience seem natural and ordinary, but it
may only be setting up the neural correlates necessary for a genuine
mystical experience.
      Both a naturalist reduction or a transcendent realism can be equally
grounded in the science. A depth-mystical experience may be an event
internal to the brain alone or it may involve a natural capacity for an
infusion of a transcendent reality. Again, scientists may be merely
identifying the conditions that make a person receptive to the experience.
Science cannot close the gap between understanding bases of the
experiences and the epistemic judgment of their significance. Most
scientists and academics reviewing neuroscientific studies of religious
experiencers dismiss visions, arguing that they have been successfully
reduced as either subjective delusions or mere interpretations of ordinary
experiences. At most, there is a sense of presence (which naturalists may
dismiss as based on some purely natural reaction that has evolved in us) that
is structured by experiencers according to their beliefs. However, many
scientists and others remain open on the issue of mystical insight. And it is
not surprising, given what we now about brain chemistry, that after thirty-
five years of interest in psychotropic drugs, Huston Smith was no closer to
answering the central problem of whether psychotropic visions can be
validated as true (2000: 127).
      One may choose one option concerning what natural explanations can
accomplish based on one’s prior commitment to a naturalist or religious
metaphysics. Or one may try to remain open on the matter by being
agnostic. The extent to which the commitment to a metaphysics determines
what is accepted as true or reasonable or even possible will not be entered
into here. The point for the issue at hand is simply that our choice regarding
what natural explanations can, at least in principle, actually accomplish will
turn on prior metaphysical commitments—the natural explanations
themselves will not contribute to this choice. In short, being religious or
antireligious is logically prior to one’s decision on the import of natural
explanations concerning whether mystical experiences are an insight into
reality.
      Ultimately, one’s decision on such metaphysical matters may in turn
depend on one’s intuitions of what in the final analysis is in fact real. But in
any case, the conclusion for the issue at hand is this: the situation here is a
case of conflicting metaphysical interpretations of the significance of
empirical data. The scientific and sociocultural explanations themselves
will not determine our choice regarding what they accomplish. Obviously
something is going on in the brain during these experiences, but simply
showing the neural grounding of these experiences cannot answer the
question of whether they have some cognitive content. Science may show
that mystical experiences are in fact genuine in the sense of involving
genuine and unique neurological events that are distinct from other type of
events, but scientific findings per se cannot resolve the metaphysical
conflict unless there is a finding of pervasive pathology in mystics. Thus,
accounts of the brain wiring and events or any physiological findings, no
matter how complete, will remain neutral on the matter of the cognitive
value of mystical experiences. We will have to determine the epistemic
value of these experiences on other grounds.
                                      5

                      Mysticism and Metaphysics