Complementarity
Many who see a similarity between mysticism and science in content but a
difference in method or vice versa speak of a “complementarity.” For many,
mysticism is a function of the right hemisphere of the brain and science the
left, so only by utilizing what comes through each separate hemisphere do
we have a “full-brain approach” (rather than the hemispheres working in
tandem). However, difficulties arise here. Mysticism and science do not
separate neatly into different compartments. It is not as if mysticism is
about the “inner world” of consciousness and science is about the “outer
world” of material objects: mystics work on consciousness, but they are
interested in the beingness of all of reality, including the beingness of the
“outer world,” and science is interested in the brain/mind. José Cabezón
elaborates the complementarity position: science deals with the exterior
world, matter, and the hardware of the brain, while Buddhism deals with the
interior world and the mind; science is rationalist, quantitative, and
conventional, while Buddhism is experiential, qualitative, and
contemplative (2003: 50). But he realizes there are limitations: Buddhism is
concerned with the external world, and science can study aspects of the
mind (ibid.: 58). It is also hard to see natural science as “rationalist” rather
than “experiential,” although there is the contrast between the necessary
conceptual element in scientific observations and theorizing versus its
lessening or total absence in mystical experiences. There are also
limitations on any compartmentalization of all elements of mystical ways of
life from science due to mystical ways of life embracing more than mystical
experiences, as just discussed.
      The idea of complementarity at least affirms that mysticism and
science involve irreducible differences.17 Each supplies a type of
knowledge the other is missing. Each endeavor has theories that give an
account of reality that is complete in the sense that it covers one aspect of
all of reality, but the accounts are of different dimensions of reality. Since
they involve different dimensions in their core claims, they are logically
independent in their core claims; thus, changes in the claims from one do
not necessitate any changes in the beliefs of the other. Neither mystics nor
scientists need to dismiss the other endeavor. If, however, mystics do reject
science or scientists do reject mysticism, practitioners of either endeavor
would not see their own endeavor as missing something important that the
other supplies. Nothing in either endeavor calls for the other type of
knowledge. Most importantly, classical mystics reject knowledge of the
“differentiations” as truly reflecting anything ultimate about the nature of
reality; thus, attempts at a reconciliation of science and mysticism that
values science as cognitive will be at odds with classical mystical ways of
life.
      The most popular way to reconcile mysticism and science as
complements is to claim that mystics are dealing with the “depth” of reality
and scientists with the “surface” of the same aspect of reality. That is,
mystics and scientists are utilizing different approaches to reality, but they
apprehend the same aspect rather than fundamentally different aspects of
the reality of structures versus beingness: mystics simply turn observation
inward and arrive at a deeper level of the same truth that scientists reach
observing external phenomena (e.g., Capra 2000). Since science and
mysticism both lead to the same basic knowledge, people only have to
choose the route that is more suitable to our own disposition and become
either a scientist or mystic—either way, they end up in the same place.
      However, advocates of this position do not see its consequence: either
mystics are producing more thorough knowledge of what scientists are
studying—i.e., they get to the root of the same subject that scientists study
and thus are doing a more thorough job than are scientists—or scientists are
examining the same subject as mystics but with more precision. Either way,
one endeavor is superseded: either mysticism’s thoroughness renders
science unnecessary or science’s precision replaces mysticism’s looser
approach. Thus, this position becomes the basis for rejecting either
mysticism or science altogether in the end. So too, since science and
mysticism are achieving the same knowledge through different routes, there
is in fact no reason to bother with the strenuous way of life that serious
mysticism requires: all we have to do is read a few popular accounts of
contemporary physics, cosmology, and biology on complexity or “the unity
of things” and we will know what enlightened mystics know and hence be
enlightened. All that matters is learning a post-Newtonian way of looking at
the world, not experiencing the beingness of reality free of all points of
view. Conversely, by the same reasoning, scientists need not go through the
expense and trouble of conducting elaborate experiments to learn about
structures—mystics have already achieved the same knowledge with even
more thoroughness through their experiences. Mystics already know what
scientists will find on the quantum level of organization in the future, so
there is no need to conduct any more experiments—physicists should shut
down the CERN supercollider and just meditate.
      In sum, if scientists and mystics are studying the same thing and one is
doing a better job, both endeavors are not needed. On the other hand, if
scientists and mystics are studying different aspects of reality that result in
completely different types of knowledge-claims, and if both do in fact
produce knowledge, then both endeavors in the end would be needed for
our fullest knowledge of reality. Together they form a more complete
picture of reality by supplying noncompeting knowledge of different
aspects of reality. It is not as if all we have to do is push further in science
and we will end up mystically enlightened, or push further in mysticism and
we will end up with a “Theory of Everything” for physics and all other
sciences. Scientists, including particle physicists and cosmologists, are not
even investigating areas that “border on the mystical,” but focus on another
aspect of reality altogether. Science and mysticism of course can be said to
have a “common pursuit of truth” and to be “united in the one endeavor of
discovering knowledge about reality,” or both “seek the reality behind
appearances.” But this only places both endeavors into a common, more-
abstract category of being knowledge-seeking activities—it does not mean
that they are pursing the same truths. Both mystics and scientists encounter
aspects of reality that we are not normally aware of, but this is not grounds
for positing any more substantive commonality—the difference in subject-
matter forecloses any greater convergence. Mystics and scientists are
engaging different aspects of reality differently, and for different purposes.
In short, scientists and mystics are doing fundamentally divergent things.
      So too, mysticism and science may share a general ideal methodology
—i.e., careful observation, rational analysis, open-mindedness, and having
background beliefs (e.g., Wallace 2003: 1–29).18 But in actual practice, the
divergence in objectives and subject-matter between cultivating mystical
experiences versus scientific measurement and explanation cause very
different implementation of any common abstract general principles. In the
end, the only commonality may be features that any enterprise would have
whose purpose is to discover knowledge of reality and that encounters
things we would not expect from our ordinary experience in the everyday
world—knowledge based on experience, use of metaphors, and so on. The
two endeavors value types of experiences and conceptualizations very
differently, and this alone precludes any deeper convergence in “method.”
                  Reconciling Mysticism and Science
If one accepts that science gives knowledge of the structures of reality and
mysticism gives a knowledge of beingness, then reconciling science and
mystical spirituality is a worthy goal: each gives knowledge of a different
but equally real dimension of reality. But a way should be sought that does
not distort them, and thus does not join them in the usual “complementary”
manner (see Jones 2010: chap. 16 for one possible reconciliation). A role
both for our discursive mind and for stilling that mind would be needed:
reason is needed in science (and as discussed in the last chapter, in
mysticism), and the discursive mind involves objectifications in
understanding the structures of reality, but the human mind may also be
capable of experiencing reality free of the activity of the discursive mind in
mystical experiences.
      At a minimum, scientific and mystical claims will always be
“harmonious,” “compatible,” and “consistent” on core claims since they are
dealing with different aspects of reality and hence they cannot intersect at
all in their basic claims. In Upanishadic terms, mysticism is a matter of
higher knowledge (para-vidya) and science would be consigned to lower
knowledge (apara-vidya) (Mundaka Up. 1.1.4–6). Basic claims in one
endeavor are simply irrelevant to basic claims in the other—logically, they
cannot converge or conflict even in principle. This makes reconciling
mystical claims and science very simple as long as mystics refrain from
making claims about how the phenomenal world works—e.g., they confine
introvertive claims to a transcendent self or ground of reality that is not an
agent causing particular events in the world. The metaphysics of naturalism
would be ruled out, but nothing from science itself could in principle
present a problem. However, as noted, mystical traditions have metaphysics
in their total ways of life that always reflect more concerns than cultivating
mystical experiences alone. Thus, problems may arise when a religious
tradition’s metaphysics specifies something that conflicts with science—in
particular, with consciousness and with a theistic god who acts in nature.
But such metaphysics do not relate specifically to the mystical experience
of beingness that is central to mysticism.
      Thus, because of their differences in concerns, mysticism and science
remain distinct endeavors and basically irrelevant to each other. At best,
there is some overlap on their edges—e.g., science may help reform
mystics’ metaphysical beliefs or show more efficient ways to meditate, and
mystical ideas may suggest new theories to devise and test in science. All
that the theories in different extrovertive mysticisms and the sciences have
in common is a general metaphysics of impermanence and
interconnectedness of the components of reality, not the specifics of any
theories in science or mysticism. Thus, their “common ground” is strictly
on a metaphysical level. Neither endeavor can verify or falsify the other’s
claims. Similarly with introvertive mysticism: introvertive mystics’ claims
involve experiencing something that is neutral to scientific claims.
      Nevertheless, this does mean that science does not, as is often claimed
in philosophy, eviscerate mysticism. One can accept theories in each
endeavor—indeed, one can practice both—without any cognitive
dissonance. But this is only because mysticism and science remain distinct
ways of knowing reality.
                                      9