Mystical Selflessness and the Presuppositions of Morality
Arthur Danto presented a version of the opposite claim from Stace’s—that
mystical experiences are in fact logically incompatible with being moral
(1987). He focused on the way traditional Asian mystical factual beliefs
might conflict with the factual presuppositions of morality.8 Two such
presuppositions in particular are a problem: the need for a moral agent and
the need for a reality toward which one can act morally. (For more on the
factual presuppositions of morality, see Jones 2004: 25–27.) Danto was not
arguing that the Asian factual beliefs are false—his is only the logical point
that if they are true, then morality is rendered inoperative; if we see reality
according to these Asian traditions, morality is no longer a possible concern
because there are no real moral agents or real persons to be morally
concerned with. Thus, we cannot adopt the classical Asian factual beliefs
and be moral.
      Advaita Vedanta does exemplify Danto’s position. Its factual belief
that Brahman is the only reality closes the space necessary for the moral
concern of one real person for another real person to operate. How can one
be moral if there is no real person to be moral toward? Morality requires a
distinction between oneself and another to help—otherwise one is only
helping oneself, which is not a moral motive. But the liberated see no such
distinctions. All that is real is a transcendent, unaffectable, and one
brahman/atman. There are no real individuals whose suffering could
concern us. Thus, there is nothing real that could make a moral demand on
us. Even though actions are apparently possible, the realm of
differentiations is reduced to a realm of illusion, and along with it so is a
possible moral concern for other parts of the illusion: we would have no
more concern for parts of an illusion than we would for the fate of the
characters in our dream. The lengths that some will go to try to reconcile
Advaita with morality is shown by Rajendra Prasad (2009): he admits the
conflict of Advaita’s metaphysics with the practice of morality but argues
that the unenlightened should be intellectually dishonest and simply ignore
what they accept as true (the metaphysics of oneness) and pretend the
phenomenal world is real. But the other major Asian mystical traditions do
not adopt a nondualistic metaphysics cum illusionism with regard to the
phenomenal world, and none support Danto’s claim. These traditions grant
sufficient reality to the parts of the realm of differentiations to provide for
the possibility of morality. Outside an introvertive mystical experience and
some forms of meditation, the factual beliefs permitting moral choice and
action can be adopted.
      Mystical selflessness also presents an issue: if there is no independent
center of reflection and agency—no “self” or “soul”—then how is morality
possible? That is, morality requires a sense of identity and agency, but
mystics achieve selflessness. Our ego (the jiva of Indian mysticism) is seen
as a phenomenal creation that does not correspond to anything real, and the
real transcendent self (the atman in Advaita or purusha in Samkhya) is
changeless and does not act. The true reality of our mental life is seen for
what it is: activity without a controlling center. The issue thus is whether
moral reflection and agency need a center of agency. Buddhists accept the
thinking, perceptions, motives, and feelings associated with agency, even
though they reject an “I” in addition to the “bundle of different
perceptions,” to use David Hume’s phrase. There is a “selfless person”—no
thinker but still the thought. However, it is not clear why an additional
distinct, self-existent entity in this mix is needed to be the controlling agent
for moral responsibility. What would it do that the other elements do not
already do? Certainly reductive materialists in the West today, such as
Daniel Dennett, can accept agency without an agent (a “self”) that controls
the mix. All that morality requires for agency is a mental capacity to think,
to choose, to will, and to act accordingly—it does not entail a commitment
to any metaphysical entities. And of the major Asian mystical traditions
only Advaita is committed to a belief-claim that conflicts with that by
making the content of the phenomenal realm no more than a dream.9
      This also bears on the second problem: whether there is a reality
toward which moral concern is possible. Buddhists believe there are
changing collections of phenomena that suffer and can be directed toward
the end of a chain of rebirths, even though they deny any substance or
center to a “person”—there is no “I” who suffers. As William Wainwright
rightly asks, how can we be compassionate toward impersonal objects
(1981: 211–12)? But a permanent core is not needed to be compassionate
toward in the configuration of elements of a “person” (see Jones 2012b:
192–98). To Buddhists, a “person” is “unreal” only in the sense that there is
nothing permanent to us and no ontologically distinct entity—no enduring,
independent center to our mental and physical configuration. The
configuration of impersonal elements constituting a “person” is constantly
changing and void of permanent parts, but it continues through time like a
rope made only of overlapping threads with no single strand running the
full length. The “person” (again, there is no permanent entity corresponding
to our conventional term) does suffer and is trapped in a chain of rebirths,
and the chain can come to an end. In no way do Buddhist mystics reduce
people to impersonal “things” in any morally negative sense—the reality
actually there “has” all the interests and capacity actually to suffer that we
can take into moral consideration. Why we must adopt a metaphysics of
some additional substantive element called a “soul” or “self” to be moral is
again not clear. Mystics may see our concepts as not corresponding to
separate, permanent objects in reality, but the flux of reality still contains
distinguishable eddies, and our conventional terms are still useful in
identifying the differentiations. In sum, there is an appropriate reality for
our moral concern—a configuration “personal” in nature that can suffer,
even if there are no independently existing “persons.”