For this chapter, let’s ignore the issues of chapters 3 and 4 and simply
assume that mystical experiences are not delusional and that there is some
cognitive substance to these experiences independent of a mystic’s prior
belief-system. Do these experiences then dispel any of the mysteries
surrounding what in the final analysis is real? These experiences give an
overwhelming sense of direct awareness of fundamental reality—a reality
that is one, powerful, immutable, permanent, and ultimate (i.e., not
dependent on another reality). The experiences also give the experiencer a
sense of selflessness—i.e., that the everyday ego is not part of the true
makeup of reality. A sense of experiencing the source of one’s
consciousness or of all phenomenal reality, accompanied by a sense of bliss,
may also be added to this list.
      This leads to one common thread in both extrovertive and introvertive
mysticism: realism. What is real is what grounds experiences and what we
cannot get around in our final analysis of things. This realism contrasts with
solipsism or with everything being a dream or an illusion with no
underlying reality. It is not the opposition in Western philosophy between
realism and idealism: its only claim is that something exists that does not
depend on our individual, subjective consciousness. That is, if we remove
all subjective illusions, something real abides, whether this something is
conscious or is material. (Indeed, even if everything phenomenal had the
nature of an illusion or a dream, there is still something there that we would
have to account for, even if it is only affirming its dependence on something
else.) Classical mystics of all stripes were realists in this general
metaphysical sense. They typically made a distinction between
“appearance” and “reality” and dismissed appearances as unreal in some
sense, but they always affirm a reality behind the appearances. In
introvertive mysticism, the entire phenomenal realm may be downgraded as
only appearance in favor of a transcendent reality. In Advaita, Shankara
dismissed the phenomena of the universe as illusions (mithyas) generated
by our root-ignorance (avidya), but he affirmed the reality “behind” the
appearances (brahman) as real—the “clay” behind all the different states of
the illusory “pot.” Indeed, he said that we can deny the existence of
something only in favor of something else being real (Brahma-sutra-
bhashya 3.2.22).
      Among extrovertive mystics, the unreal appearance is the
disconnection of entities from other phenomena that we generate by our
conceptual differentiations. The Buddhist Perfection of Wisdom texts use
analogies of mirages, dreams, optical illusions, echoes, reflections, and
magicians’ tricks to explain that the phenomena of the world are empty of
anything that would give entities any type of permanence or independence
and to explain how phenomena can be mistaken to be independent “real”
things. The Buddhist Nagarjuna’s doctrine of emptiness (shunyata) leads
many to portray him as an antirealist. And he can be seen as a linguistic
antirealist: he believed the world does not correspond to the conventional
entities (bhavas) that we carve out of the phenomenal world through our
conceptualizations (see Jones 2014b: 136–43). But he was not an ontic
nihilist who argues that in the final analysis there is nothing real. That is,
there is something real, even if the discreteness of entities that we project
onto it is not real. Entities are empty of anything giving them independence
and self-existence (svabhava) and thus are unreal in that sense, but there is
something real there (tattva), and it can be known and seen as it truly is
(yathabhutam), even if there are no real borders in the phenomenal world
for our concepts to mirror. So too for other extrovertive mystics: the world
of appearances is not irreducibly real, but it is not completely unreal either.
However, an extrovertive mystical experience is needed to see things as
they really are.
      Moreover, there is tension between all mystical experiences and all
doctrines of what is real: mystical experiences require an emptying of the
mind of all conceptual content—for Meister Eckhart, all “images” are to be
destroyed—and yet mystics advance doctrines about what is experienced
both so that they themselves can understand what they experienced and to
lead others to the new awareness. Not all mystics are particularly interested
in doctrines, let alone the details of religious theory, any more than most
members of any religious tradition are. Jiddhu Krishnamurti believed that
we are weighed down by such doctrines as rebirth—his only concern was in
inducing a “choiceless awareness.” He avoided reading religious literature
to protect himself from beliefs. But, as discussed, classical mysticism is
about more than special “mystical experiences”: it is about trying to align
one’s life with the way things really are. And this means having the correct
view of the ultimate nature of things. The nature of three things in particular
is central: a human being, the world in general, and any transcendent
realities. Mystical metaphysics thus is not about what is beyond experience
but about the most general nature of reality.