Science and Mystical Metaphysics
Since science and mysticism involve different ways of knowing and
different aspects of reality, there should in principle be no conflicts between
them.15 But the situation is complicated by the fact that mysticism involves
more than just cultivating mystical experiences: mystical ways of life
attempt to understand the significance of these experiences by laying out
the general nature of a person, the world, and transcendent realities in order
that mystics may align their lives with reality “as it really is.” The factual
claims within such metaphysics about the person and the world may interact
with scientific theories. This is not an interaction of mystical experiences or
insights with modern science but a matter of the encompassing
metaphysical beliefs of particular mystical traditions. Thus, mysticism and
science as ways of knowing may be totally independent, but the claims
from total mystical ways of life and science about the world are not.16
      In general, mystics may show interest in the structures of experiences,
but they show little interest in the physical structures of the experienced
world. For example, Buddhist theorists discuss mental phenomena
extensively, but only in the context of how to end suffering, not out of a
disinterested desire to know the nature of the mind in general. In the
detailed Abhidharmist dharma analysis noted in chapter 5, the focus is on a
phenomenology of consciousness to help clear the mind of obstacles in
order to achieve the desireless state, not on a scientific analysis of the
world. That there is little interest in the material world is revealed by the
fact that in the Sarvastivada tradition, the closest concept to
“matter”—“form” (rupa)—is only one of seventy-five factors of experience
(dharmas). And even then, “form” relates only to our experience of things
and not to matter in itself or energy; it is about the forms that we directly
experience, not any possible substance behind them. By naming things, we
give what is actually real a form—hence, the common phrase for the
physical world: “name and form (nama-rupa).” Classical mystics in general
simply do not express any intellectual curiosity about understanding matter
or identifying the structures at work in the world or devising explanations
of such structures, which makes perfect sense in light the mystics’ interest
in an aspect of reality not amenable to scientific analysis.
      Most often, mystical traditions also adopt ideas from the encompassing
religious traditions and the culture of their society and era. For example,
Hindu and Buddhist mystics adopted the traditional Hindu cosmology, the
“physics” of earth, water, fire, and air, and also the idea of karma and
rebirth. Daoists similarly adopted the standard Chinese cosmology, with the
Way ordering the constant flux of things. With the presence of such
metaphysics in mystical ways of life about the general nature of the natural
world, ideas from different mystical systems do enter the same arena as
science, and this creates the possibility that a particular scientific theory and
the doctrines of a particular mystical tradition will agree or conflict.
Different mystical traditions advance beliefs about the structures related to
the mind and human beings (in particular, on the nature of consciousness
and on something in us that survives death), and these may agree or conflict
with specific scientific theories in neuroscience. The historical sciences—
cosmology, geology, evolution—may present specific problems for the
creation myths of different religions, and mystical belief-systems will share
any of these problems when these myths are adopted from their
encompassing religions.
      However, attempts to create one general worldview for “mysticism and
science” that encompasses both scientific findings and a “mystical view of
things” usually end up twisting both science and mysticism. Advocates of a
thorough holism want particular theories—in particular, a role for
consciousness in physical events—and thus they stand apart from the
current mainstream in physics and neuroscience. So too, they would have to
edit mystical systems. All mystical traditions in their hands become one
unified generic “mystical system.” The diversity of mystical beliefs
throughout history is ignored—either one tradition is deemed the “essence”
or “epitome” of all mysticism, or a “perennial philosophy” becomes a
control belief for how mystical traditions are construed. For all depth-
mystical traditions, all phenomena become manifestations or emanations of
an underlying conscious source. This fits the Upanishads’ emanationism but
not Advaita’s “identity” metaphysics or Samkhya’s dualism of matter and
multiples selves. Extrovertive mystical experiences of beingness also do not
by themselves justify the idea that all things in the universe mutually
influence all other things or bring about each other’s existence or are
mutually interconnected the way the jewels of Indra’s net are. In sum, such
a vision certainly does not express the “true essence” of all mystical
traditions of the world.