Mystical Experience Versus Scientific Measurement and
                           Theorizing
Most people studying the relation of mysticism and science only see that
both mystics and scientists are approaching reality and are out to gain
knowledge based on experiences; thus, they assume that mystics and
scientists are engaged in gaining the same type of knowledge through
different techniques. This leads to the New Age claim that science and
mysticism are the same basic endeavor. That there may be fundamentally
different aspects of reality that would foreclose any substantive
convergence of knowledge-claims is not usually considered. This includes
even physicists making comparisons of physics to Asian thought (e.g.,
Mansfield 1976, 1989, 2008). But what was discussed above should be
sufficient to conclude that mystics and scientists are not focusing on the
same aspects of reality.
     Also consider the types of experiences central to each endeavor:
mystical experiences require the suspension of the very activity of the mind
necessary for scientific measurements and theorizing—i.e., analytical
functions of the mind. Extrovertive mystical experiences involve a
lessening or discarding of conceptual differentiations. Introvertive mystical
experiences suspend sense-experiences. The depth-mystical experience
requires a complete stilling of the analytical mind: a “forgetting” of all
images—all sense-experiences and mental differentiations are suspended.
Indeed, mystics around the world see conceptual constructs—the very stuff
of scientific theories—as positive impediments to achieving mystical
experiences. Were mystics interested in the same aspect of reality as
scientists, what scientists find through language-guided observation and
theorizing would be seen as aids to mysticism, not obstacles. And how
could mystics approach the same aspect of reality that scientists are
interested in with a mind free of attention to differentiations? All
measurements are concept-guided: preconceived questions and categories
direct scientists’ attention to particular aspects of phenomena. Scientists
look for something in particular: they select, label, categorize, and measure.
When theorizing, they make predictions about what they will observe, they
don’t attempt to “unknow” all that is conceptualized. Scientific observation,
in short, is a reaction to concepts. Both extrovertive and introvertive
mystical experiences involve an “unknowing” of all the knowledge that we
normally accumulate in our everyday life through our senses and the
analytical function of the mind, including all scientific knowledge. This
means again that the tentatively held constructs of science established
through conjecture and measurement would have to be discarded. Again,
the different approaches of mysticism and science to reality are appropriate
for different aspects of reality: emptying the mind of distinctions to
experience what is common to everything versus focusing on distinctions
among objects to measure how things interact to determine how they work.
     If scientific knowledge is necessarily concept-driven while mystics try
to experience reality in a way that transcends the conceptual, logically, how
can the two types of knowing end up with the same type of knowledge?
Granted, knowledge in both mysticism and science has a conceptual
element, but scientific measurements always involve a mixture of the
conceptual and the experiential, while at least depth-mystical experiences
are direct experiences of reality unmediated by conceptualization. How can
the knowledge resulting from conceptualized and unconceptualizable
experiences be the same? Indeed, if scientific and mystical claims were
about the same subject, then mystics are wrong when they say that what
they experience cannot be conceptualized.
      Mystical states of mind utilize different functions of the mind than do
scientists in their measurements and reasoning. To Plotinus, the mystical
intellect (nous), a mental faculty distinct from both sense-experience and
reason (ratio), shares in and knows only beingness. Even if there is no
separate faculty, a different brain configuration is involved. Meditation too
is clearly experiential, but this does not make it the concept-driven
observation of the empirical method of scientific knowing. Simply being
experiential does not make yoga a “science of the mind.” The empirical
method requires observations of a different kind—those particularized by
conceptions for measurements and testing hypotheses. Mystics do make
predictions about the results of their actions: if one attains selflessness,
desires will end, and according to Indians this leads to an end of rebirth. But
such claims are not being tested, nor are new things being discovered—only
established knowledge is being recovered.10
      The basic ontic claim for extrovertive mysticisms is that phenomenal
reality is impermanent, interconnected, and constantly changing; some
mystics also see it as grounded in a transcendent reality. Thus, the natural
world has no discrete, permanent objects. Does this mean that there are no
permanent structures in nature for scientists to find? No. Mystics deny only
that there are permanent objects in nature, not that permanent structures
may not be shaping them. As far as mysticism is concerned, there may be
natural joints to nature to be described and explained in science. For
example, as noted in chapter 5, the law of karma, involving our actions and
their repercussions, is taken as lasting as long as the universe does.11 But
the flux of the mental and physical parts of the universe is still
impermanent. Thus, even if scientists determine that the laws of nature are
permanent or in some sense transcend time and space, this does not change
the impermanence of phenomena in the everyday world that is the subject
of extrovertive mystical interest. That is, what mystics focus on is the
impermanence of the experienced, everyday level of the world, not
anything about the nature of the laws governing it. So too, it would be
irrelevant if scientists find permanent bits of matter/energy below the
everyday level. In fact, in an anti-empiricist move the early Abhidharma
Buddhists posited extremely minute uncuttable and undestroyable particles
of matter (paramanus) not open to sense-experience. Scientists, on the other
hand, are not making any claim about the permanence of everyday things
structured by the forces they discover. Mystics may think that scientists are
missing the point of reality or are even deluded by focusing on
differentiations, and scientists may think that mystics are misguided by
fixating on the unchanging beingness of nature. But as long as scientists can
see nature as in flux, science and extrovertive mysticism need not conflict
in principle. That is, science is not counterevidence to mysticism as long as
scientists can agree that the objects on the everyday level are not permanent
—i.e., that interactions are between what are ultimately different temporary
configurations. This neutralizes what many see as a conflict between
extrovertive mysticism and science.
      Mysticism’s central objective is not acquiring disinterested knowledge
about how something works—it is transforming the person. This is not to
say that scientists are uninterested in the consequences and practical
applications of their research, but that in mystical traditions there is no
fundamental interest in learning the how-ness of things only for the sake of
learning how things work, as with basic scientific research. The focus in
mysticism is working on the mind, but again mystics are not exploring the
workings of the mind to discover new scientific facts even about how the
mind works. Buddhism does not involve a systemic study of mental states
to learn how the mind works—it is focused on overcoming our fundamental
suffering. Today Neo-Buddhists, including the Dalai Lama, find the
discoveries in physics, cosmology, and biology fascinating, and they accept
that scientific theories may affect doctrines in their way of life, but they
must admit that such discoveries in the final analysis are irrelevant to their
central quest. And, if science touches core doctrines of a tradition (e.g.,
rebirth or consciousness), there are limits as to how much accommodation
to science they may accept, as the Dalai Lama admits (see Jones 2011a:
108–10).
      A scientific interest in efficient causal structures is not a way to any
type of mystical enlightenment: focusing on identifying and explaining the
structures of reality only increases attention to the differentiations in the
world (and theorizing increases the amount of differentiations). It will never
lead to the calming of the mind necessary for mystical experiences. The
Buddha left questions about the age and size of the universe unanswered as
irrelevant to the soteriological problem of suffering (Digha Nikaya 1.13,
3.137; Majjhima Nikaya 1.427; Anguttara Nikaya 2.80), and no doubt he
would leave all scientific questions about even the workings of the brain
unanswered for the same reason.