The Antimystical Climate Today
But today there are factors in our culture working against taking mysticism
seriously. Within academia, those who bother to take a metaphysical
position very often adopt naturalism—i.e., the view that all that exists is
only what is open in principle to scientific examination. Naturalists can
readily accept that genuine mystical experiences occur and can also accept
any verified physiological or psychological benefits of meditative
practices.1 Indeed, naturalists themselves may have mystical experiences,
which they would give a natural explanation.
      But naturalists deny classical mysticism’s cognitive claims. They reject
all transcendent realities or explanations, since by definition these would be
untestable by scientists in any fashion, and hence go beyond science. Thus,
they keep introvertive mystical experiences, along with extrovertive
experiences, within the phenomenal universe. They may deny that depth-
mystical experiences occur that involve truly emptying the mind of all
sensory and conceptual content, arguing that all experiences are intentional.
And if they do accept such an experience, they would insist that it is either
the result of the brain malfunctioning, or at most an awareness of a purely
natural self or only a monitoring activity of the mind that continues even in
the absence of any processing. That is, consciousness has arisen through the
natural forces of evolution, but a depth-mystical experience may be the
experience of it in a bare state. Such an event may be of interest to
neuroscientists studying how the brain works, but there is no transcendent
consciousness or self separate from the body that survives death. Moreover,
the experienced sense of joy proves to naturalists that the experience is not
cognitive of a transcendent source, since the appalling natural suffering of
eons of evolution of animal life proves that this universe is not the creation
of a loving being—the bliss results from the purposeless spinning of mental
gears when there is no mental content to work on—and that mystics take
the bliss as indicating an experience of something transcendent only shows
that the experience is misleading them. Naturalists can accept extrovertive
mystical experiences as experiences that focus on the sheer beingness of the
natural realm, although they may contend that nothing of value is revealed
by such experiences since it is not scientifically relevant. All that happens is
that the area of the brain responsible for a sense of a boundary between the
self and the rest of the universe receives less input and the area attaching
importance to events is more active, and so mystics naturally feel more
connected to the universe, which in naturalistic metaphysics we in fact are.
Nothing about the unreality of the self is exposed, but the self-
transcendence valued in spirituality can thereby be achieved, even though
this transcendence does not exceed the natural realm. And there are
“religious naturalists” today who find aspects of nature as satisfying their
religious needs.
      The academic study of mysticism would not even go that far toward
accepting mystical experiences today. Many postmodernists in academia
deny that there are any genuine mystical experiences and ignore
neuroscientific studies suggesting that unique mystical experiences do
occur. In philosophy, the topic of mysticism has generally faded into the
background. The dominance of constructivism and attribution theory in
religious studies also plays down the significance of mystical experiences.
Under the latter, “mystical experiences” become nothing but a mystical
overlay given to mundane experiences and emotional states. Under the
former, mystical experiences are accepted as possibly genuine, but they
have no independent cognitive content and play no role in the development
of any tradition’s doctrines. There is nothing to study of mysticism outside
of a tradition’s texts. Any mention today of mysticism in the study of, for
example, Buddhism is rare. Indeed, in the humanities, mysticism has
become “unfashionable” and a “bad name” (Cupitt 1998: 56, 45). Even
scholars who accept that there are depth-mystical experiences dismiss out
of hand any claim that they are cognitive (Bharati 1976: 48; Forman 2010).
In sum, mystical experiences, if they are accepted at all, have been pushed
aside as at most a curiosity for neuroscience.
      Within Christian theology, the situation is similar. A generation ago,
the Jesuit William Johnston lamented that “from the time of Thomas à
Kempis better men than I have been attempting to convert the theologians
[to the need for theologians who are also mystics]—and they have been
conspicuously unsuccessful. The theologians remain unregenerate” (1978:
58). Today the situation is no different. To postmodern theologians, the
experience of God is impossible on logical grounds (since God is by
definition transcendent), and to view God through the lens of “experience”
is hopelessly naive (see Hart & Wall 2005). The past focus on interiority in
any spirituality is now seen as having been a mistake (Thomas 2000). The
questions that Christian mystics raise for theology visibly embarrass many
academic theologians (McIntosh 1998: 14). Indeed, in theology today any
“experientialist” approach to mysticism that would affirm any genuine
mystical experiences is “thoroughly dated” (Nicholson 2011: 194).
      Outside of academia, serious mysticism is in a general decline in the
West. In mainline Christian churches, the split between spirituality and
theology since at least the early modern period has led to a decrease in
interest in anything mystical. According to Michael Buckley, the divorce of
spirituality from fundamental theology in Catholicism has led to bracketing
the actual witness of spiritual experiences as having no cogency (quoted in
McIntosh 1998: 14). Hans Blumenberg puts the very definition of
modernity in terms of “self-assertion” (1982: 138). He is not contrasting it
with mystical selflessness, but nevertheless classical mystics would readily
agree. Under the modern view, the mystical denial of self-assertion certainly
makes mystics appear irrational and their passivity immoral. More
generally, our era can be defined by “a loss of faith in transcendence, in a
reality that encompasses but surpasses our quotidian affairs” (quoted in
Smith 2000: 655).2 Unlike premodern people, we no longer live in a “sacred
universe” in which all aspects of life are permeated with transcendent
significance. Even if transcendent realities are intellectually accepted, they
are cut off from this world and everything in life and thus do not affect our
living. Many who are scientifically minded have lost any comprehensive
myth that makes this world understandable and the travails of life bearable.
Any sort of focus on an inner spiritual development of any mystical
experiences or the radical self-transcendence and transformation of
character of an enlightened mystical way of life has been discouraged by
liberal churches as unnecessary, if possible at all. Liberal theists may be
happy with the theistic mystics’ message that the universe is animated by
love, but the claim that someone had actually experienced God would
probably only make them uncomfortable, since God is seen as having
withdrawn from his creation. In conservative churches, other types of
experiences related to personal salvation have become emphasized, and the
idea of any mystical awareness of God is seen as blasphemous. Fears of
antinomianism have limited mystical influences in most traditions of
Judaism today. So too, Islam today has seen a steep decline in Sufism. In
monasteries Eastern and Western there is little emphasis on serious
meditation. For example, Thomas Merton complained that there were few
or no real contemplatives even in many Catholic contemplative
monasteries, because rigid conformity to rules prevented it (2003: 78, 123–
30). And if reports are correct, in most Buddhist monasteries today few
monks under age fifty meditate at all; nirvana is seen as only a long-term
goal.3 (But in the past more monastics may also have been like that than we
might suppose.) The authoritarian nature of monastic training also runs
counter to the spirit of our age.
     Psychology today only strengthens the ego and self-esteem. Few
people would want to give up the sense of individual existence when the
assertion of self-will dominates our culture—purposefully inducing any
type of selflessness is precisely what most people do not want to do today.
Buddhist teachings on selflessness have become transformed in
psychotherapy into a way to actually enhance the sense of self. (One
Buddhist practitioner dismissed psychotherapists as “pimps for samsara
[the cycle of rebirths].”) Ironically, serious mysticism is dying even as New
Age spirituality is increasing; many young people describe themselves as
“seekers”; people claiming to be mystics are flourishing on the Internet.
And mystical experiences apparently remain common (Hardy 1983; Hood
2005). The superficial spirituality of the New Age is more about validating
how one currently leads one’s life than about any serious change in a
mystical direction—a watered-down spirituality of a “Buddhism Lite,” as it
were. Jiddu Krishnamurti’s complaint seventy years ago that people flocked
to his lectures but no one transformed their lives (Lutyens 1983: 171) is
applicable more generally to mysticism today. Today there may be a spike
in interest in mysticism as people search for a sense of certainty and
reassurance of the rightness of things in a time of uncertainty and search for
a way to feel experientially grounded in the world and connected to other
people, but there is little commitment to any rigorous traditional spirituality
with its developed depth. Most New Age theorizing is disconnected from
cultivating any mystical experiences. Few people stick to meditation long-
term. And more meditation is practiced for its purported psychological and
physiological benefits than as part of a mystical way of life. It is a sign of
our culture’s spiritual decline that this is considered an advance.
      All of this leads to a trend today toward the secularization of mystical
experiences. Cultivating mystical experiences—in particular, mindfulness
meditation—has been absorbed into parts of modern culture while engaging
in full mystical ways of life has atrophied. That is, even among those who
endorse mystical experiences for our well-being (e.g., Kornfield 2001;
Forman 2010, 2014; Harris 2014), mystical experiences are being separated
from mystical ways of life with their religious goals, i.e., from mysticism.
Traditional religious metaphysics and transcendent goals are ignored;
traditional mystical ethical codes are at best watered down. For example,
one can adopt aspects of a Buddhist way of life while being agnostic about
its factual claims about rebirth and karma (Batchelor 1997). A total inner
transformation is not always the goal. Teachers of complicated
metaphysical doctrines are no longer needed, nor is adherence to difficult
monastic ethical codes. Traditional meditative techniques may be adopted
to calm the mind or to focus attention fully on the present, thereby
increasing our happiness, but any claim that mystical experiences may
provide cognitive insights into an aspect of the phenomenal world or into a
transcendent reality is not so much denied as simply ignored as irrelevant—
all that matters is the physiological or psychological well-being that
mystical experiences or meditation may foster. The significance of the
experiences is exhaustively studied by scientists, and so all mystical
metaphysics is beside the point. For many today the only ontic claim that
mystical experiences can support is that only the natural mind and body is
involved, not a transcendent mind or other reality. Scientific studies are
taken as reinforcing the view that the only value in mystical experiences is
in their effect on the body; the issue of whether the brain states that
scientists observe may permit insights into the nature of reality does not
arise. Any understanding of the significance of mystical experiences that
involves alleged transcendent realities can be set aside. Traditional
mysticism is replaced by a naturalistic spirituality where self-transcendence
involves no claim of cognition. Only the phenomenal world is deemed real,
and so mystical experiences can still be seen as aligning experiencers with
how things really are if they enable experiencers to have greater personal
well-being and to function better in society. Thus, far from inspiring a
hatred of the natural world, mystical experiences are taken as making us
more at home here: with no transcendent realities to worry about, such
experiences can make us feel more connected to reality as it truly is and
thus help us overcome any emotional or cognitive alienation from the
natural world that society has generated.
      Overall, our culture has become too affluent and comfortable for
people to want to escape it, and too materialistic to think that the vertical
dimension of beingness is of any importance. From a mystical point of
view, we have lost sight of the ontic source of this realm—we are not even
aware of the possibility that we are in Plato’s cave. So too, our awareness of
alternatives makes it harder for us to commit fully to anything and thus
makes us more superficial. In addition, our technology has produced so
many distractions that it is difficult to focus our attention fully on anything:
it is hard to commit fully to the moment in the barrage of so many options
confronting us and so much information at our fingertips—indeed, ours can
be called the “Age of Distraction” (Loy 2008). It is not that science or
philosophy has refuted mystical knowledge-claims, but rather that we have
lost interest in mystical matters and we see mysticism as counterproductive.