Mindfulness
Mindfulness, exemplified in Buddhism, falls into the group of extrovertive
experiences when sensory data are involved. But it is not necessarily
extrovertive: it may involve internal mental differentiations free of all
sensory input.17 To mindfulness mystics, the analytical mind alienates us
from what is real, and language is its tool: conceptualizations embedded in
language stand between us and what is real, interfering with our view of
what is actually real.18 Thus, language-guided perception is the opposite of
mindfulness. Through habituation, our everyday perceptions, and indeed the
rest of our consciousness, become reduced to no more than seeing the very
categories that our mind has itself created as being present in the external
world—consciousness, in the words of the very nonmystical W. V. Quine,
becomes only the reaction of our mind to our own prior reactions.
Mindfulness counters this: it loosens the grip that the concepts we create
have on our sense-experiences, inner experiences, and actions. The sense of
a separate long-term ego vanishes (Farb et al. 2007). In mindfulness
meditation, one does not try to suppress thoughts and feelings but rather to
observe them silently as they occur without mental comment; in this way,
they do not become distractions but other objects of awareness.
      Mindfulness thus consists of simply being totally focused on what is
occurring in the present moment without judgment or commentary, whether
it is pleasant or unpleasant. (This is easier to describe than to achieve—as
the Buddha put it, it is easier to quiet a tree full of monkeys than to quiet the
mind.) One comes to experience the only moment in which we are actually
alive without being distracted by the past or future (Kabat-Zinn 1994). Such
mindfulness results in seeing the flow of sensory input and the inner
activity of the mind as it is free of memories, anticipations, emotional
reactions, and the normal process of reifying the content into distinct
objects based on our conceptualizations. The world is seen as a constant
flux without discrete objects. Thus, mindful states of consciousness still
have sensory or nonsensory mental content, but some or all the background
structuring normally associated with such content has been removed. Such
mindfulness may be a transient experience, but it also may become an
enduring state of transformed consciousness.
      Mindfulness exercises in working, walking, or just sitting destructure
the conceptual frameworks structuring our perceptions. Like other
meditation, this can lead to increases in vitality and energy. The resulting
focus of attention produces an inner calm and clarity of awareness. This is
not so much a change in the content of our sensory consciousness and inner
awareness as a change in our relation to that content. Our usual way of
thinking and experiencing both fade away. We normally see rugs and hear
trucks—with pure mindfulness all structuring would be removed and we
would see patches of color and texture free of rugness and hear sourceless
noises. This is a “bare attention” to what is presented to our senses, without
attention to anything in particular and with no accompanying intellectual
expectations or emotional reactions. It is not a trancelike state or self-
hypnosis or a state of unconsciousness—one remains fully awake and
remembers it afterward. But it does involve a complete focus on what is
being presented to the mind.
      We like to think that we normally see the external world “as it really
is,” but neuroscientists have found otherwise. There is evidence that our
conscious and subconscious mind creates an image of the world, not merely
filters or structures sensory data (see Peters 1998: 13–15). Experiments
show that our mind “corrects” and constructs things (e.g., filling in visual
blind spots). More generally, apparently our mind automatically creates a
coherent, continuous narrative out of all the sensory input it receives. We
see a reconstruction of the world, and this leads to the question of whether
our visual world is only a “grand illusion.” Overall, the mind seems to have
difficulty separating fantasies from facts—it sees things that are not there
and does not see some things that are (Newberg & Waldman 2009: 5). It
does not even try to create a fully detailed map of the external world;
instead, it selects a handful of cues and then fills in the rest with conjecture,
fantasy, and belief (ibid.). Our brain constructs a subconscious map that
relates to our survival and another map that reflects our conscious
awareness of the world (ibid.: 7). Mindfulness interferes with this
fabrication, making us more alert and attentive, and thus lets in more of the
world as it really is into our awareness. Indeed, contra cognitive science,
mindfulness mystics claim that we can have a “pure” mind free of all
conceptualizations that mirrors only what is actually there.
      It is this sense of “illusion” that is the central concern of mindfulness
mystics: conceptualizing off independent “entities” from the flow of events.
We live in a world of items conceptualized out of the flow of events and
react to our own conceptions. Only in this sense is the world “unreal” or an
“illusion,” and what we need to do is to rend the conceptual veil and get to
what is really there. To convey the sense of what is real and what is illusory,
Chandogya Upanishad 6.1.3–4 gives the analogy of a clay pot. The clay
represents what is real (i.e., the permanent beingness lasting before and
after whatever shape it currently is in) and the potness represents what is
illusory (i.e., the temporary and impermanent form the clay is in at the
moment). If we smash the pot, the “thingness” is destroyed, but what is real
in the pot (the clay) continues unaffected. Mindfulness mystics see the clay
but no distinct entity (the pot).19 And they do not dismiss the world as
“unreal” or “illusory” in any stronger sense. (Even for the depth-mystical
Advaita Vedanta the world cannot be dismissed as a complete nonreality:
the world is neither the same as Brahman nor distinct from it, and so its
ontic status is indescribable [anirvachaniya].) That is, mindfulness still
involves a realism about the experienced realm, but it is a realism not
grounded in an awareness of sensed differentiations or linguistic
distinctions.
      Through mindfulness there is Gestalt-like switch, not from one figure
to another (e.g., from a duck to a rabbit in the Kohler drawing), but from
any figure to the bare colors. That is, our awareness becomes focused on the
beingness of the natural realm rather than the things that we normally
conceptualize out. (This is not to deny that there are figures but to see their
impermanence, interconnectedness, and beingness.) There is an openness
and passive receptivity not previously present. This permits more richness
to the sensory input that is now freed from being routinely cataloged by our
preformed characterizations. The experiences may not have the intensity or
vividness of cosmic consciousness or nature mystical experience, but
perception is refreshed by the removal of conceptual restrictions.
      In the resulting state, an experience of a uniformity and
interconnectedness to all we experience in the phenomenal realm comes
through—what Nagarjuna called the “thatness” (tattva) of things—is
presented to the senses. In particular, with this new sense of shared
beingness any sense of a distinct ego within the natural world vanishes. The
conceptual border separating us from the rest of the natural world has been
broken, with the resulting sense of an intimate connectedness of everything.
In sensory mindfulness, one can be aware that there is content in your mind
without dropping out of the experience, unlike in a depth-mystical
experience. And if an experience involves a sense of the presence of a
transcendent reality in nature or of the “mind of the world,” then the mind is
still not emptied of all differentiated content as with the depth-mystical
experience.
      With mindfulness, we see what is presented to our mind as it is, free of
our purposes, feelings, desires, and attempts at control. The content of
sensory experience remains differentiated, but we do not pick and choose,
setting one conceptually distinct object against another. The mindful live
fully in the present, free of temporal structuring, witnessing whatever arises
in their consciousness without judging and without a sense of possession,
and they respond spontaneously. (As discussed in chapter 9, this
spontaneity does not necessarily mean that mystics are acting free of values
and beliefs; even in their enlightened state, mystics may have internalized
values and beliefs from their religious tradition or other sources.) To most
of us, the present is fully structured by our past categories and our
expectations and future intentions. To mystics, as long as we have this
intentional mind, we have no access to reality: only with a mindful mind do
we no longer identify with our thoughts and emotions but simply observe
things free of a sense of self, living fully in the “now.” There is a shift in
consciousness from mental categorizations to an awareness of the sheer
beingness of things. In Buddhism, a person with a concentrated mind knows
and sees things as they really are (yathabhutam). Awareness is freed from
the dominance of our habitual categorizations and anticipations, and our
mind becomes tranquil and lucid. Jiddhu Krishnamurti called this
“choiceless awareness” (Lutygens 1983: 42).
      The field of perception is no longer fragmented. Awareness is no
longer tied to the images we manufacture—i.e., in Buddhist terms, it no
longer “abides” anywhere or “grasps” anything. In the words of the Dalai
Lama, “nondual perception” is “the direct perception of an object without
the intermediary of a mental image.” Note that he does not deny that there
is something there to be perceived—only now we see it as it really is, free
of conceptualizations setting up dualities. The false world we create of
distinct, self-contained entities is seen through, and phenomenal reality
appears as it actually is. The mind mirrors only what is there, without
adding or distorting whatever is presented. Mental categories no longer fix
our mind, and our attention shifts to the “thatness” of things, although some
conceptual structuring will remain present in all but a state of pure
mindfulness.
      Since language refers to the differentiations in the phenomenal realm
and is itself a matter of differentiations, mystics always have trouble with
applicability of language to undifferentiated beingness. Moreover, empirical
studies of meditators suggest that a nonlinguistic aspect of the brain is
attuned to beingness, and thus conceptualizations remove us from the
proper state of mind to experience beingness. In addition, even phenomenal
reality cannot be mirrored in any conceptualizations: words denote distinct
entities, and according to mindfulness mystics phenomenal reality is not
constructed of discrete parts. But mindfulness mystics are generally realists
in the broad metaphysical sense: extrovertive mystics uniformly reject the
idea of ontologically distinct, independent, and self-contained entities
within the phenomenal world, but they affirm a reality “beneath” such
concept-generated illusions—only objectness is an illusion generated by the
mind. That is, the beingness of the world’s phenomena is affirmed, although
it may also be seen as related to a theistic or nonpersonal transcendent
source. Such common-sense realism does not have a built-in
correspondence theory of epistemology or any views on materialism,
determinism, reductionism, or naturalism.
      Misled by the appearance of permanence and our categorization of
what is experienced, we unenlightened folk “create” distinct objects by
imposing our ideas onto the world—i.e., reifying our conceptualizations
into a world of multiple, distinct entities. What is actually there independent
of our conceptualizations is real, but we take the conceptual and perceptual
distinctions we ourselves create as capturing what is “real” in the world.
Most importantly, this includes the idea of a distinct ego. Buddhists affirm
that there is thinking and other mental events, but no thinker: if we think of
the “person” as a string of beads, there is a succession of beads (momentary
mental events) but no string. So too, the discrete “objects” of sense-
experience and introspection are “unreal” only in this limited sense: the
beingness behind the conceptual differentiations remains real and
undifferentiated. While still on the path to enlightenment, a mindfulness
mystic sees individual “objects,” but it is their beingness that is the focus of
attention, and once enlightened any self-contained individuality in the
experiencer or the experienced world is seen as illusory. In sum, we misread
sensory experience and construct an illusory world of multiple realities out
of what is real in phenomena. What we conceptually separate as “entities”
are only eddies in a constantly flowing and integrated field of events. That
is, the world of multiple “real” (independent, self-contained) entities is an
illusion but not what is really there—the eddies in the flow of events are not
unreal but are simply not isolated entities, unconnected to the rest of the
flow. The alleged discrete entities are the “discriminations” that Buddhists
deny are real.
      Thus, with mindfulness we see the mundane with fresh perceptions. It
removes habituation from our perceptions. It renews attention to all that is
presented and ends the role of concepts guiding our attention. Our attention
is “purified” regardless of what we are observing. Mindfulness is thus not
about attaining a state of consciousness unconnected to observations, or
seeing something special about the world, or anything more (or less)
profound than seeing the flow of the world as it is free of the constraints of
our conceptualizations and emotions.