Indirect Avenues of Aid
Since mysticism and science deal with different dimensions of reality,
neither can offer direct aid to the other; as noted earlier, neither can offer
verification or any empirical support or disconfirmation for theories or
beliefs in the other field. Nor could what mystics experience about reality
be used as a “god of the gaps” to fill in holes in scientific theories, since the
uniformity of beingness experienced in any type of mystical experience is
not an explanation for why one state of affairs is the case and not another.
Theories in the two fields will always be about different aspects of reality.
      As discussed in chapter 4, some people advocate expanding
neuroscience to incorporate the direct, first-hand approach to knowledge of
meditation. Such an expansion would cause major changes in neuroscience.
But even if these changes in neuroscience do not occur, mysticism can offer
some indirect aid to science. Scientists need to come up with new ideas
when exploring and trying to understand and explain the workings of the
natural world, and doctrines in mystical traditions are one possible source
of new ideas.12 Theories in mystical traditions on consciousness and
perception may provide ideas that scientists can work into scientific
hypotheses. Mystical traditions such as Buddhism that emphasize
mindfulness may be more fertile grounds for ideas for possible scientific
hypotheses than traditions such as Advaita that emphasize the depth-
mystical experience; the former’s systems of metaphysics emphasize
analyzing the phenomenal world, while the latter can ignore such “details”
in discussing the ontic status of the entire natural realm. Mystical ideas may
be too general to give rise to any specifics for a scientific theory, although
stories and images in mysticism may touch off a scientist’s imagination. But
this does not make mysticism part of science: ideas for hypotheses can
come from any cultural sources—the chemist Friedrich August Kekelé got
the idea for the benzene ring from a hallucination he had while gazing into
a fire after a long day of work, of two whirling snakes each grabbing the
other’s tail and thus forming a circle. Scientists still must rework any ideas
they derive from any source into actual scientific hypotheses and then must
determine on scientific grounds alone if any of these new hypotheses are
valuable: the ideas themselves do not entail any scientific hypotheses and
are not themselves scientific evidence, any more than Kekelé’s dream is.
However, religious ideas have a tendency of going from being helpful
candidates for scientific hypotheses to being “control beliefs” that their
advocates assert for nonscientific reasons and that would restrain the
development of science (see Jones 2011a, 2012a). Neo-Buddhists may also
veer off in that direction (see Jones 2011a: 107–10).
      So too meditation may help scientists clear their minds and focus their
attention. However, scientific research cannot be conducted during
meditation: introvertive concentrative meditation ignores the outer world,
and mindfulness meditation interferes with the type of attention to
distinctions guided by conceptions that is needed to execute experiments,
make scientific measurements, and develop new theories. In “forgetting
oneself,” mindfulness does involve the objectivity of disinterest, and this is
how scientists are supposed to approach their research and their findings.
But meditation may also quell emotions or the attachment to a particular
scientific theory, and emotions and attachment to a particular theory may
drive scientific research. So too, mindfulness quells the wandering mind
that has been connected to creativity. The selflessness of a mindful state
also goes beyond the mere lack of self-interest: it lacks the attention to
distinctions that scientists need and thus interferes with science.
Enlightened mystics do still see differentiations among phenomena (even
though they do not see these in terms of permanent, distinct entities), but to
conduct scientific observations and theorizing they would have to change
the focus of their attention back to the differentiations from beingness.
      Science may also offer indirect aid to mysticism. The lack of new
theories in classical mystical belief-systems since the Middle Ages points to
the fact that beingness and the source of beingness are not open to fresh
mystical experiences or new analyses. In particular, depth-mystical
experiences simply remain the same. Since there is no new experiential
input, in the future any new mystical conceptualizations of what is allegedly
experienced in the different types of mystical experiences will reflect input
from other cultural sources. And here science may help indirectly: scientific
theories may be one such source of new ideas for new analogies for
understanding what was experienced. Indeed, there were new mystical
doctrines or systems put forth in the twentieth century based on science:
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin and Shri Aurobindo each combined mysticism
with biological evolution, even though it is the evolution of consciousness
that they were concerned with (see King 1980). But this does not make the
science that is utilized mystical, any more than any ideas modified into
mystical theories from other sources thereby make those sources mystical.
      Second, scientific theories may aid the understanding of the
metaphysical theories that mystics put forth. For example, the Dalai Lama
finds Einstein’s theory of relativity as giving “an empirically tested texture”
to Nagarjuna’s theory of time (Gyatso 2005: 205–6). But again, such
indirect aid does not make science a mystical endeavor—it only offers one
possible nonmystical source of assistance for comprehending mystics’
metaphysics. Moreover, there is also the very real danger that this practice
can actually inhibit our understanding of mysticism if we continue to think
about scientific structures and not beingness or if we force mystical ideas to
conform to our scientific understanding. That is, seeing mystical
metaphysics through the prism of science may distort one’s understanding
of mystical ideas and practices (and vice versa) (see Jones 2010: chap. 7).
      Third, for those who want to modernize a premodern mystical
tradition, science can weed out factual claims from the tradition’s
worldview that are now known to be inaccurate. Arguably, this is a
requirement of rationality. As long as such claims are irrelevant to the
mystical objectives of the tradition, this is no problem. But there is a danger
that advocates of, for example, a “scientific Buddhism” may change the
nature of Buddhism to make it seem “scientific.”
      Fourth, science may help mystics find more efficient meditative
techniques. But science cannot be a “spiritual path.” For example, for a
scientist who thinks of nature as God’s creation, research can be “for the
glory of God,” but this does not make science mystical any more than
spinning cotton became mystical after Gandhi utilized it as a practical type
of mindfulness training.