Are There Genuine Mystical Experiences?
Three positions in contemporary academia deny that mystical experiences
are what they seem. Most followers of these positions deem mystical
experiences noncognitive. The first position denies that there are in fact any
true mystical experiences or, if there are such experiences, that they do not
play a significant role in religious traditions. It is based on the fact that
classical mystics normally do not discuss their own experiences. At best,
mystics attribute such experiences to traditional figures such as the Buddha
and St. Paul. Indeed, it is often hard to tell from their writings if religious
thinkers have undergone mystical experiences or are nonmystical thinkers
whose systems are not informed by personal mystical experiences but are
merely the working out of the logic of some mystically influenced
philosophical or religious ideas. One has to ask whether the writings of a
given author reveal an inspiration of mystical experiences. I would argue
that the “mystical theology” of the “founder of Christian mysticism,”
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, does not evidence the author having had
any mystical experience; rather, he merely applied the ideas of Plotinus,
who the records suggest did have mystical experiences, to Christian
doctrines (also see Vanneste 1963). But Denys Turner argues this
conclusion for all alleged medieval Christian mystics—he rejects the
“contemporary ‘experientialist’ misreading” of these texts (1995: 5). He
asserts that these texts are actually “anti-mystical” if mysticism is seen in
terms of cultivating certain types of experiences (ibid.: 4). And Robert
Sharf argues that meditative experiences do not figure prominently in the
formation of Buddhist doctrine or in the practice of monks and nuns
historically (1995, 1998). “Transformative personal experience” may not
have been as central to traditional Buddhist monastic practice as modern
exegetes would have us believe (1995: 232). The author of a prominent
Theravada meditation manual, Buddhaghosa, does not refer to his own
meditative experiences, and so Sharf concludes that he probably did not
have any. He argues that the emphasis on mystical experiences comes only
from modern Buddhist apologists after the encounter with the West. And
many observers note that today meditative practices are not prominent
among monks in Buddhist monasteries—work, rituals, recitations, and
memorization of doctrines are considered more important. Meditation is
often limited to only the most senior monks. Buddhist traditions also have
at various points in their history fallen into dogmatism and scholasticism as
much as Christian traditions have, suggesting a focus on doctrine over
actual experiences.
      All this fits well with the postmodernists’ attempt to assimilate
knowledge totally to the social. Mysticism can be deconstructed as simply a
type of political writing—a way of expressing opposition to religious
institutional authority and doctrines (Cupitt 1998: 10–11, 57). Moreover,
language goes “all the way down” and there is no cognition prior to
language (ibid.: 11). In Jacques Derrida’s proclamation, “There is nothing
outside the text.” The idea of “mystical experiences” died in about 1978,
“drowned by the rising tide of postmodern culturalism” (Cupitt 1998: 21) as
no more than a modern psychological invention, and thus the possibility of
genuine mystical experiences or states of consciousness can be ignored—
scholars now can focus on just the books.
      However, one cannot conclude from the lack of the discussion of a
person’s own experiences that he or she did not have mystical experiences
or that mystical experiences did not shape religious doctrines. Turner and
Michael Sells (1994) rightly point out that Christian mystics discuss the
nature of God and not personal experiences. But one important reason for
this is that, unlike in modern science, experiences were not considered
authoritative for establishing doctrinal claims. Mystics instead appealed to
the tradition’s authorities (the Bible, the Quran, the Vedas, the Buddha’s
discourses, and so on). In the words of John of the Cross: “I trust neither to
experience nor to knowledge since they may fail and deceive,” but to
“Divine Scripture” (1958: 94). That the Pseudo-Dionysius wrote under the
name of a New Testament figure shows how little authority he attached to
himself and any experiences he might have had. Nor was this meant to be
deceptive by giving more authority to the works—it only indicated that
authority did not lie with current authors. So too, there are no first-hand
reports from Shankara. For Shankara, the only “means to correct
knowledge” (pramana) for knowledge of Brahman for the unenlightened is
the revealed Vedas (shruti), not personal direct insight (anubhava)
(Brahma-sutra-bhashya 1.1.1–2).4 In India in general, realizing
enlightening knowledge is considered the recovery of past knowledge and
not a discovery of something that was previously unknown and had to be
established; thus, one’s own accomplishment is not noteworthy. So too,
many traditions prohibit boasting about one’s spiritual achievements in
public as contrary to humility, and even mentioning one’s own experiences
in writings would no doubt qualify as a type of bragging.
      In such circumstances, one would not expect mystics to discuss their
own experiences. Nevertheless, the writings of such figures as Meister
Eckhart and Shankara make it clear that they value the direct personal
awareness of a transcendent reality as centrally important to their ways of
life, not just the acceptance of a tradition’s doctrines. Interpreting, for
example, Bonaventure’s “journey of the mind to God” or Eckhart on the
“birth of the son in the ground of the soul” as not pointing to mystical
experiences is tortured at best. So too with the medieval Christian mystics’
references to “rapture” and “ravishment.” Eckhart referring to making
oneself a “desert” and to the “unknowing” (unwissen) of all “images” is not
about the “negativity of experience” (Turner 1995: 264) but about an
experience in which all conceptualizations are gone—an experience that is
now filled with a transcendent reality (see Eckhart 2009: 34–36 on
unknowing). God is unknowable in that he is, in Eckhart’s terms, “beyond
every thought and image”—i.e., he is not open to being an object of the
analytical mind—but the beingness of God is not unexperiencable. The
mind is not “empty,” as when one is knocked unconscious. Nor is there
reason to conclude, as the theologian Mark McIntosh does (1998: 136–37,
142), that medieval Christian mystics encouraged their followers to let go
of all experiences: mystical experiences are not necessary for Christian
salvation, and there is more to any religious way of life than cultivating
mystical experiences, but the texts make clear that the experiential “union
with God” and the alignment of one’s will with God’s were still valued.
Eckhart denounced being tied to any technique that claimed to compel God
to act; he valued a life aligned with God’s will over any “ecstatic
experiences”; and he valued doing God’s will in acts of charity over any
experience. But nothing suggests that he ever denounced awakening to the
presence of God in the depth of the soul, i.e., the breakthrough
(durchbrechen) of the birth of God in the soul and of the birth into the
Godhead.