The Analytical Philosophical Approach
Mysticism will be examined here philosophically. This is not to say that
other approaches are not valid or useful. No mystical phenomenon is
exclusively mystical or of only one “nature”: like all human phenomena,
mystical phenomena have cultural, social, psychological, and physiological
components. Thus, mysticism can be legitimately approached from different
perspectives in the social sciences, history, humanities, and neuroscience,
with different aspects of mysticism appearing through each. No one
approach is exhaustive. Each is limited by the type of questions asked and
by what counts as an answer, but each can reveal aspects of mysticism that
other perspectives must omit by the limitations of their questions. The
different approaches need not conflict: since different disciplines deal with
different aspects of mystical phenomena and reflect different interests, one
discipline need not in principle deny what is revealed in other disciplines—
only if a discipline claims to be the only explanation needed must there be
conflicts. All that is claimed here is that approaching mysticism by asking
philosophical questions can reveal something valuable of mystics’
experiences, knowledge-claims, and values.
      The analytical philosophical approach focuses on one particular
abstraction from total mystical ways of life: the skeleton of beliefs and
values—i.e., the knowledge-claims made by mystics about the nature of
reality, human beings, and so on, and the value-claims about what is
valuable or significant, ethics, and the goals of the ways of life, and their
justifications. Analytical philosophers look at the truth, rationality, and
coherence of such claims. If mysticism were merely a matter of emotion,
mystics’ claims would not be of great interest to most philosophers. But
mystics claim to have experienced some fundamental reality in a way that is
not open to normal experiences. Philosophers look at how mystics use
language, and they also examine how religious claims work and are
justified in order to examine what role mystical experiences may play in the
development and defense of the doctrines and values of a mystical tradition.
They also look to see whether there is any scientific evidence for such
experiences. This leads to making an evaluation of the truth or usefulness of
mystical claims. This is not to deny the fullness of mystical ways of life or
to claim that knowledge-claims and value-claims are the central feature in
the lives of mystics: doctrines may not figure prominently in how one leads
one’s day-to-day life. Nor are mystics out to test a hypothesis or to prove
the existence of God, but rather to lead a particular way of life. Indeed, like
most people, mystics may pay very little attention to their doctrinal
knowledge-claims. Nor does what appears through a philosophical
perspective make the intellectual core the “essence” of a mystical way of
life or its most important aspect for all pictures of mysticism. But this
abstraction is central to our understanding and appreciating any way of life.
(As will be noted in chapter 2 postmodernists today downplay any role for
knowledge-claims in mysticism.) Philosophical analysis can also help
mystics themselves in understanding their own commitments, and by
clarifying issues it may indirectly help create new mystical doctrines.
      Thus, both explicit claims and implicit claims entailed by practices and
by the explicit claims are central to the philosophical abstraction of
mysticism. However, although knowledge- and value-claims can be
abstracted from mystical texts, this does not mean that the aim of mystics is
to advance disinterested beliefs about the nature of the world or ethics. Nor
can all the different uses mystics make of language in prayers, instruction,
and so on be reduced to just making assertions. Nor does focusing on
doctrines disparage the rest of a mystical way of life. In fact, we cannot
understand mystical claims outside their setting within a way of life: we
need to look at different aspects of a mystic’s full way of life to understand
the intellectual skeleton—just as the human skeleton can be understood
only in the context of the full body and its activities, so too the
philosophical skeleton can only be understood in the context of the full,
lived way of life. So too, mystical action-guides must be understood in their
context of a mystical goal and beliefs about what is real (see Jones 2004).
Focusing on the intellectual content without considering the lived way of
life would be like focusing on musical notes on a sheet of music and
forgetting the music. But it is the task of historians in religious studies
studying the human phenomena connected to religion to show us the beliefs
and values that are integral to each particular mystic’s way of life, and
philosophers must rely on their findings to understand those beliefs and
values and mystics’ arguments.
      Philosophers ask questions that mystics may find irrelevant to how
they lead their lives. For example, the problem of competing knowledge-
claims may be irrelevant to mystics, who typically are convinced of the
truth of their own tradition’s claims. Nevertheless, the philosophical
approach leads to basic questions. Do mystics in fact have unique
experiences? How do their experiences relate to their claims? Are these
experiences cognitive? That is, do mystics gain insights into the nature of
reality, or are mystics delusional in some way? Does the scientific study of
meditation invalidate mystical claims or in fact validate them? Do the
experiences justify belief in transcendent realities? Is only one particular
view of alleged transcendent realities justified? Can mystics express what
they experience? Are mystics irrational in their discourse and arguments?
Do their experiences have any necessary consequences for values and
morality? Thus, all the major areas of philosophy are involved: identifying
the phenomenon being studied (chapters 1 and 2), knowledge (chapters 3
and 4), metaphysics (chapter 5), language (chapter 6), rationality (chapter
7), the relation to science (chapter 8), and ethics (chapter 9). Clarifying such
matters through analysis can also help historians and scientists who work on
the empirical side of the study of mysticism.
                                      1

                 Mysticism and Mystical Experiences