Postmodernist Concerns
One new issue is the postmodern questioning of the very term “mysticism”
as a useful or even valid category. The term is not common to all cultures
but was invented only in the modern era in the West. This has led
postmodernists to question whether the term can be used to classify
phenomena from any other culture or era. (Wilfred Cantwell Smith spent a
generation trying to banish the term “religion” from academic discourse on
similar grounds. And a generation before that, Gilbert Ryle asserted the
same of “science”: “There is no such animal as ‘Science’ ”—i.e., there is no
“science” in the abstract but only “scores of sciences” [1954: 71].)
However, although the terms “mysticism” and “mystics” are relatively new
Western inventions, it does not follow that no phenomena that existed
earlier in the West or in other cultures can be labeled “mystical.” All claims
are made from particular perspectives that are set up by culturally-
dependent ideas and conceptualizations, but this does not mean that they
cannot capture something significant about reality, any more than the fact
that scientific claims are made from points of views dictated by particular
scientific interests and specific theories means that scientific claims must be
groundless. This is true for any term: the invention of a concept does not
invent the phenomena in the world that the concept covers. The natural
historian Richard Owen invented the term “dinosaur” in the 1830s to
classify certain fossils he was studying. However, to make the startling
claim “Dinosaurs did not exist before 1830” would at best only be a
confusing way of stating the obvious fact that classifying fossils with this
concept was not possible before the concept was devised if dinosaurs
existed, they existed much earlier, and their existence did not depend on our
concepts in any fashion. (Claiming “Dinosaurs did not exist before 1830”
may sound silly, but a postmodernist has made the claim that scientists
invented quarks. And postmodernists do regularly claim that there was no
religion or Buddhism or Hinduism before modern times.)
      The same applies to our concepts about human phenomena such as
mysticism. Even if there are no equivalents of “mysticism,” “mystics,” or
“mystical experiences” in Sanskrit, Chinese, or any other language, this
does not rule out that scholars may find phenomena in other cultures to
which the terms apply and reveal something important about them. Nor
does using a Western term mean that we need not try to understand
phenomena from other cultures in their own terms: classifying something
from India or China as “mystical” in the modern sense does not make it
Western or modern any more than classifying Sanskrit or Chinese as a
“language”—another term of Western origin with its own history—makes
them into Western phenomena or mashes all languages into one. A few
scholars deny that there is any “languages” in reality (e.g., Noam Chomsky
and Donald Davidson), but few advocate expunging the word “language”
from English or deny that the cross-cultural study of languages may reveal
something of the nature of all languages. In sum, introducing the modern
comparative category of “mysticism” does not change the character of the
phenomena of a particular culture; it only focuses attention on certain
aspects of cultural phenomena, and this may lead to insights about them.
      A second line of postmodern attack is that the use of the term
“mysticism” suggests some unchanging “essence” to all mystical
phenomena when there is none. As discussed in chapters 1 and 2, there is
no generic “mysticism” but only specific mystics, traditions, and
experiences. Nevertheless, we can use a term to classify certain phenomena
without assuming some unchanging essence to those phenomena. Indeed,
by the same reasoning, no classificatory terms of any kind could ever be
used: there are, for example, no “dogs” but only German shepherds, various
breeds of terriers, and so forth and these categories in turn break down with
cross-breeding. Using the word “dog” does not mean that such animals (to
use another classificatory term) have not been constantly evolving
throughout history or have an “essence”—it only means it is a convenient
way to classify some current animals. A term can indicate defining
characteristics, and the phenomena can still be constantly changing. The
borders of what is and is not a “dog” may or may not be clear, and the same
applies to any classificatory term: there may not be hard and fast boundaries
between “mystical experiences” and other types of experiences or between
“mysticism” and other cultural phenomena. Such terms in fact may only
work in terms of what Ludwig Wittgenstein called “family resemblances,”
but this does not mean that they are not useful for classifying some
phenomena or that the classification may not reveal something significant
about the nature of such phenomena. (So too, claiming that concepts from
different cultures fall into the general category of “transcendent realities”
does not mean that they all mean the same thing or that they all are referring
to one reality.)
     A third area of concern is the very attempt at any philosophical
assessment of the truth-value of mystical claims to knowledge.
Postmodernists deny that there are any cross-cultural standards for
accepting or refuting the claims made in any “way of life”—there can be no
judgments of truth or falsity from outside a way of life. The justification
and rationality of beliefs are also internal to each way of life. Problems with
the postmodernists’ position on truth will be pointed out in chapters 3 and
7. A fourth postmodern claim—that there are no genuine mystical
experiences or, if there are, they do not add any knowledge—will be
discussed in chapter 2.