A Typology of Mystical Experiences
To summarize: mysticism involves an inner quest to remove differentiations
from the mind, and all mystical experiences involve calming the mind,
leading to a loss of a sense of a distinct phenomenal ego. But falling into a
common category does not make all mystical experiences the same or of
only one type. Philosophers over the years have advanced various
typologies for mystical experiences.25 Patterns of descriptions of mystical
experiences in accounts from different cultures do seem to exist that permit
placing the experiences in certain broad categories. Typologies are typically
based on mystics’ claims about the reality allegedly experienced rather than
on a bare phenomenology of the features of the experiences themselves.
Early attempts distorted the picture by omitting classes of mystical
experiences. Walter Stace (1960a) stuck with the basic distinction of
“extrovertive” and “introvertive” experiences and ended up with denying
any distinctive theistic mystical experiences. As noted above, he and Ninian
Smart (1965) took what theists see as a distinctive type of introvertive
experience to be theological interpretations of other mystical experiences.
R. C. Zaehner (1957) distinguished three types of mystical experiences:
profane “panenhenic (all-in-one)” experiences of nature, monistic
introvertive experiences in which the soul is united to a nonpersonal
absolute, and theistic introvertive experiences of union with God through
love. He had to force Samkhya dualism of matter and selves to fit his
second category; he also had to argue that all Buddhists and nontheistic
Hindus had the monistic “soul” experience but merely interpreted it
differently. His typology also omits Buddhist mindfulness experiences, and
he later acknowledged that Zen experiences do not fit his typology (1970:
203–4).
     But Zaehner appears correct in asserting that introvertive theistic
experiences are different from the nonpersonal “monistic” experience that is
empty of any differentiated content. As discussed above, in any theistic
introvertive experience with a sense of being connected to some reality,
there is differentiation, and this differs from the emptiness of the depth-
mystical experience. However, both Stace and Zaehner can be criticized for
bringing unwarranted value-judgments into the picture. Stace considered
extrovertive experiences to be preliminary, partial, or lower-level
introvertive experiences rather than a truly separate category; introvertive
experiences are more complete mystical experiences and more valuable
philosophically and historically (1960a: 62–63, 132). For him, all
introvertive experiences are also the same—different accounts merely
reflect differing doctrinal interpretations imposed post facto on the same
experience. This is central to his “universal core” thesis that all extrovertive
and introvertive experiences share a common experiential phenomenology.
But there does not appear to be any reason based on experiential evidence
to believe that this is the case. For starters, that the physiology of
mindfulness meditators and concentration meditators differs strongly
suggests otherwise. So too, Zaehner ranked theistic mystical experiences
above depth “monistic” mystical experiences and “profane” nature
mysticism (since there can no true spiritual experience of the world) for
nothing but purely theological reasons.
     More recently, “perennial philosophers” have advanced four types of
mystical experiences. For Huston Smith, four types of mystics correspond
to four levels of reality: beginning mystics engage the depths of nature;
intermediate mystics engages angels and demons; celestial mystics have a
personal relationship with a personal deity; and infinite mystics unite with
the Godhead beyond God (1976). Ken Wilber also has mystics
corresponding to levels of reality: natural, theistic, formless, and nondual
mysticisms correspond to psychic, subtle, causal, and nondual realities
respectively (1996).
     But the philosopher William Wainwright offers a more metaphysically
neutral typology of four types of extrovertive experiences and three types of
introvertive experiences that appears to capture the phenomenological
evidence well (1981: 33–40). With a slight modification of terminology
based on distinctions in this book, the types are these:

          •Extrovertive experiences:
               ♦ The sense of connectedness (“unity”) of oneself with
               nature, with a loss of a sense of boundaries within nature
               ♦The luminous glow to nature of “nature mysticism”
               ♦ The presence of God immanent in nature outside of time
               shining through nature of “cosmic consciousness”
               ♦ The lack of separate, self-existing entities of mindfulness
               states
          •Introvertive experiences:
               ♦Theistic experiences of connectedness or identity with God
               in mutual love
               ♦Nonpersonal differentiated experiences
               ♦ The depth-mystical experience empty of all differentiable
               content

Also, distinguishing mystical experiences along lines of those with
conceptual content and those without will become important in the next
chapter.
      Not only should the experiences be distinguished, but introvertive and
extrovertive types of mysticism result in different types of metaphysics
involving different dimensions of reality. Introvertive mysticisms involve a
reality that transcends the phenomenal world (e.g., a source of being), while
extrovertive mystics are concerned with the phenomena of the experienced
world of diversity and need not incorporate transcendent realities.
Introvertive mysticism thus involves a timeless, immutable, and changeless
“vertical” dimension to reality, while mindfulness metaphysics involves the
constantly changing “horizontal” world of becoming.
      The difference in metaphysics is reflected in two types of nonduality.
There is the depth type (the nonduality of the transcendent source of being
and the experienced phenomenal realm) and the extrovertive type (the
absence of a plurality of independently existing entities within our
phenomenal world). Both involve nonduality, but they are not about the
same level of reality: the former involves the depth-dimension of the source
of beingness, and the latter the surface-dimension of the phenomenal world.
In short, there is a difference between “vertical” and “horizontal”
nonduality. So too, there are corresponding different senses of oneness:
realizing the one simple, undivided reality of the depth-experience versus
realizing that we are not isolated entities but parts of the one interconnected,
impermanent whole of the natural realm or that everything is of the same
nature, sharing the one beingness common to all. There are also
corresponding vertical/horizontal differences in the idea of illusion: in
depth-mysticism, the illusion is that the whole natural universe is
independently real rather than having a transcendent source; in extrovertive
mysticism, the illusion results from conceptualizing discrete “real” entities
from the continuous and connected flow of things.26