If we accept science, must we reject mystical claims to knowledge?
Naturalists answer “yes”—mystical knowledge-claims are rejected out of
hand because they are not objectively checkable in a third-person manner.
On the other extreme, New Age thinkers believe mystical and scientific
claims are converging (for criticism, see Jones 2010, forthcoming). Some
scientists do show interest in mystical claims. However, probably more
scientists today would agree with Stephen Hawking who, in responding to
his colleague Brian Josephson’s interest in Asian mysticism, said that the
idea of mystical influence on science is “pure rubbish,” adding: “The
universe of Eastern mysticism is an illusion. A physicist who attempts to
link it with his own work has abandoned physics” (quoted in Boslough
1985: 127).
     Obviously merely having a mystical experience does not conflict with
science: one can have any experience regardless of what theories scientists
may hold. Rather, it is the alleged cognitive significance of mystical
experiences that brings mysticism into contact with science. (Whether
science can explain mystical experiences was discussed in chapter 4.)
Mysticism can come into contact with science in two ways: mystical claims
about the nature of the world compared to current scientific theories, and
mystical experiences as a particular way of knowing reality compared to
science as a way of knowing reality.1 Mystical claims do not necessarily
conflict with science. Extrovertive mystical experiences involve the
beingness of nature and not scientific findings. Introvertive mystical
experiences can be given a natural explanation (e.g., Angel 2002). Even if
the introvertive experiences are given transcendent explanations, they can
be compatible with scientific accounts of events in the world: such
experiences can be seen as realizing a reality that was already present in the
experiencer (God or another transcendent reality as the ground of the soul
or of all of nature), and so no intervention by a separate transcendent reality
occurs; experiencers do not change ontologically but only realize what has
always been the case. In addition, as long as alleged transcendent realities
are not seen as causes in the natural order, science will not have a say on
whether they are real or not. Any transcendent reality would obviously
conflict with the metaphysics of naturalism, but as long as the mystic’s
mind is doing the experiencing (as opposed to a god intervening in nature to
affect the mystics’ brain), mystical experiences are as natural as sense-
experiences, and their transcendent explanations remain a matter of
metaphysics.2 Naturalism too is a metaphysical position—one in which
science is seen as entailing the rejection of transcendent realities. But, as
noted in chapter 3, one can reject the metaphysics of naturalism and still
accept science as providing the best knowledge of the day, and by doing so
one can also accept transcendent claims that are consistent with scientific
findings.
      Mysticism and science each intend to provide knowledge of reality, but
there are major differences in the two endeavors even if we accept that they
both are cognitive. Mystics and scientists both have problems with language
when encountering phenomena outside of the everyday realm of
experience, but we cannot make any substantive convergence of mysticism
and science out of these problems: merely because both scientists and
mystics have problems expressing what they encounter does not mean they
must be encountering the same thing. So too, both mystics and scientists
must use metaphors when they encounter the unexpected outside the
everyday realm or the realm of ordinary experience. But this only means
that mystical and scientific thought is human thought encountering
something new—it tells us nothing whatsoever about whether scientists and
mystics are talking about the same aspects of reality.
      Paradoxes also appear in both mysticism and science when the
practitioners are confronted with contradictions between their expectations
shaped by their everyday experiences and what they now experience. But
paradoxes do not function in the same way: in mysticism, the aim is to
abandon all conceptualizations altogether in order to experience beingness
or its source free of the analytical mind, while in science the objective is to
push through a paradox and to replace an inconsistent conceptualization
with one that consistently reflects what has been observed. Paradox thus
may provoke more research or new theories in science; in mysticism, it may
evoke an experience but not necessarily a concern for new conceptual
systems. This points to a fundamental difference between science and
mysticism, even though both endeavors are experience-based: the centrality
of formulations in science versus the need to transcend all formulations for
mystical experiences to occur; the former reflects science’s concern with
differentiated phenomena, and the latter reflects mysticism’s goal of getting
beyond differentiations to experience beingness unmediated by any
conceptual or emotional framework.