Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences
Nevertheless, two types of reductions discrediting mystical claims have
been advanced in this field: scientific reductions of mystical experiences to
nothing but electrochemical activity in the brain or some other physical or
biological phenomenon, and sociocultural reductions of the experiences to
social, psychological, or cultural phenomena.7 First the former. Scientists
look for the biological or chemical conditions within the body such that
anyone under those conditions would probably have a certain type of
mystical experience. A one-to-one correlation of conscious states with the
bodily states of the brain or other parts of the body would permit the
stimulation of the mechanisms at work in the body during mystical
experiences, thereby inducing an experience. For a true correlation, there
must be a one-to-one relation of changes in states of consciousness with
changes in bodily states. All the phenomenological content of the
experiences also must be accounted for. Different neural and physiological
bases and explanations are currently being proposed (see Cahn & Polich
1999; Wulff 2000; and Lutz et al. 2007 for overviews).8
     There are currently five areas of scientific research.9 First, drugs
administered to subjects cause a percentage of them—sometimes 70-some
percent—to have either extrovertive or introvertive mystical experiences.10
From William James experimenting with nitrous oxide (1958: 298) to
Aldous Huxley’s experiences with mescaline (the active ingredient in
peyote) (1954, 1955) to Walter Pahnke’s “Good Friday” experiment with
psilocybin (the active ingredient in “sacred mushrooms”) (1966; Smith
2000: 15–32) to Robert Masters and Jean Houston’s work on LSD (1966),
early advocates claimed to duplicate all the phenomenological elements of
mystical experiences making them experientially indistinguishable—not
merely something “similar to” a mystical experience or a “partial” mystical
experience. Bruce Eisner found that the drug “ecstasy” led patients to a
profound sense of “unconditional love” and to a state of empathy in which
they, others, and the world seemed basically good (1989). Altered states of
consciousness, including mystical ones, have been part of religion since its
early days (see Winkelman 1999). More than 10 percent of the hymns in the
Rig Veda are to soma, a psychotropic plant used in rituals. Indeed, many
claimed that drug-induced experiences among early shamans and others are
the source of religion.11 Terence McKenna (1992) has argued that we have
deep genetic roots for a need for intoxicants and that psychoactive drugs
played an important part in human evolution (see also Weil 1986; Siegel
1989).
      Drug studies were revived in clinical studies in the 1990s, first with
DMT (N,N-dimethyltryptamine) (Strassman 2001). The effect of drugs on
the production of the neurotransmitter serotonin, which plays a role in
regulating consciousness, has been of special interest because they inhibit
prefrontal cortex activity. LSD apparently deactivates regions of the brain
that integrate our senses and our sense of a “self.” It may also loosen the
“reducing valve” of the mind that permits in only the data we need
(Goodman 2002). In addition to more intense visual and aural sensations,
this can lead to an extrovertive sense of being united to the rest of reality
without any memory loss. But drugs can also have disturbing and terrifying
effects. In addition, “cosmic consciousness” and LSD experiences may be
qualitatively different states of consciousness (Smith & Tart 1998).
However, in one psilocybin study, three-fifths of the participants had what
the scientists considered “complete” mystical experiences; one-third of the
participants considered it the most significant spiritual experience of their
lives, and for another quarter it was one of the top five; and the significance
lasted more than a year (Griffiths et al. 2006, 2008). A long-term study of
Pahnke’s experiment also showed that the induced mystical experiences had
lasting positive effects (Doblin 1991). Other studies also found that
experiences occasioned by psilocybin caused persisting positive changes in
attitudes, mood, life satisfaction, behavior, altruism/social effects, and
social relationships with family and others (Griffiths et al. 2006, 2008).12
Such experiences have also led some drug users to adopt a mystical way of
life.
      Many in the religious community are enthusiastic about these drug
results, claiming that drugs induce the same experiences induced by other
means such as fasting and meditation by producing the same biological
effects in the brain as those activities do and that this proves mystical
experiences are veridical. However, since James Leuba (1929), others have
argued that these are nothing but subjective brain events. Others object on
theological grounds that these are not “genuine” mystical experiences but
only a superficial copy with no spiritual component—true mystical
experiences are different in nature and content and come only from God. R.
C. Zaehner tried mescaline and ended up only with an upset stomach (1957:
212–26). (But this does point to the issue of a proper dosage and supportive
conditions [Griffiths et al. 2011].) He concluded that “nature” and
“monistic” mystical experiences may be triggered by drugs, but “theistic”
introvertive mystical experiences can be produced only by acts of grace
from God (1957: 14–29)—no set of natural conditions such as ingesting a
drug can compel God to act.13 To some, drug-induced mystical experiences
seem unearned and undeserved (see Pahnke 1966: 309–10). But all agree
that the “set and setting” (the psychological disposition and beliefs of the
subject and the physical setting) are important and at least partially account
for the great variation in the experiences: drugs more often facilitate
mystical experiences when the subject is prepared for one by pre-
experience spiritual practices and beliefs and in a religious or otherwise
favorable setting, but the disruption caused by drugs cannot guarantee a
mystical experience will occur even then. Also, most volunteers for such
experiments are spiritually inclined and seek mystical experiences, and thus
they are already predisposed to having such experiences.
      A second area involves other alleged “triggers” producing mystical
experiences. Such events as listening to music, contemplating the beauty of
nature, illness, stress, or despair can trigger extrovertive or introvertive
mystical experiences. On the other hand, many meditate daily for years
without producing any mystical experiences. But from John Lilly’s sense-
deprivation tanks in the 1950s to Michael Persinger’s “God helmet” (1987),
scientists have produced devices that appear to be able to induce mystical
experiences in a significant percentage of subjects. As discussed below,
nothing can force a mystical experience to occur 100 percent of the time,
but naturalists use the mere possibility of artificial triggers to conclude that
mystical experiences are purely natural events that are touched off naturally
without any transcendent realities existing.
      The third area is the study of brains damaged by trauma and psychotic
and schizophrenic states of mind. The neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran’s
focus on microseizures in the left temporal lobe of patients is a prime
example (1998). The classic account of this type of epileptic seizure comes
from Fyodor Dostoyevsky, who put it in the words of a character in his
novel The Idiot: “His mind and heart were flooded with extraordinary light;
all torment, all doubt, all anxieties were relieved at once, resolved in a kind
of lofty calm, full of serene, harmonious joy and hope, full of understanding
and the knowledge of the ultimate cause of things.” Michael Persinger also
found that brain-injured patients sometimes had a “sense of presence”: if
the damage is to the left hemisphere, the presence may be a voice and be
positive; if the damage is to the right hemisphere, the presence is more
likely to be frightening and to be seen as an evil ghost or demon (Horgan
2003: 95). Religious experiences are thus simply the left hemisphere seeing
the activity in the right hemisphere as a separate religious entity. Early in
the twentieth century, William James derided the “medical materialism”
that explained away Paul’s vision on the road to Damascus as a discharging
lesion of the occipital cortex, he being an epileptic; Teresa of Avila as a
hysteric; and Francis of Assisi as a hereditary degenerate (1958: 29). It
remains common to conclude that there is “little doubt” that the experiences
of at least some mystics from history, such as Teresa of Avila and Catherine
of Siena were the result of temporal lobe epilepsy even though scientists
must admit that their biological details are “too meager to allow an accurate
assessment” (Dewhurst & Beard 1970: 504). More refined attempts to
explain all features of all religious and mystical experiences in terms of the
stimulation of the temporal lobe structures are still popular—Persinger sees
the experience of God as nothing but “a biological artifact of the human
brain” (1987: 17). Isolated mystical experiences are explained by short
bursts in the relevant locus in the brain, and longer-lasting states are
explained by chronic disturbances.
      The fourth area is the recent neuroscientific scanning of meditators’
brains and physiology during meditation, which is central to the budding
field of cognitive neuroscience.14 In particular, “mindfulness neuroscience,”
which examines the neural mechanisms and systems supporting
mindfulness meditation, has become a “hot topic” (Tang & Posner 2013a:
1). More and more neuroscientists today are concluding that mystical
experiences are unique “genuine, neurobiological events” worthy of study
(Newberg, d’Aquili, & Rause 2002: 7). And with advances in noninvasive
technology (especially neuroimaging), the last few decades have seen a
marked increase in studies of the effect of meditation and other spiritual
exercises (e.g., fasting, contemplative prayer, and liturgical practices) on
brain activity and on other parts of the body. The experiences apparently
have reproducible and measurable biological effects, and advanced
meditators can produce more stable and reproducible mental states than can
the untrained (Lutz et al. 2007: 257). The effect of meditation on various
functions can be studied (e.g., changes in blood flow or in metabolic or
respiratory activity), as can changes in the autonomic nervous system and
neurochemical activity in the brain as with any other physical event, since
such activity is subject to the same laws of physics and chemistry as any
other activity. Meditation’s effect on such mental activities as attention,
perceptual sensitivity, responses to stimuli, and the regulation of emotional
states can also be studied. Meditative practices may also induce short-term
and long-term neural changes (Lutz et al. 2004). Different structures (e.g.,
the left amygdala and right hippocampus) are now drawing attention.
      Lastly, scientists are also asking whether there is a genetic base to
mystical experiences (e.g., Hamer 2005) or at least a genetic propensity to
having mystical experiences. There may not be a unique “God gene,” but
there may be a genetic basis for mystical experiences or for pursuing
spiritual goals. Whether there is some evolutionary basis for the continuing
presence of these experiences in human history (i.e., some genetic
advantage in cultivating such experiences or spirituality in general) is also
being examined (e.g., Hardy 1979).