Positive Characterizations of Transcendent Realities
The extreme opposite of silence is the affirmation of some positive features
of transcendent realities. In Christianity, affirmative theology is called
“kataphatic,” from the Greek “kataphasis” meaning “speaking with.” And
mystics do ascribe positive properties to transcendent realities—if nothing
else, they are “real,” “one,” and “immutable,” even if such abstract
properties may not be very helpful to the unenlightened. Indeed, mystics
may believe that what was experienced is profoundly significant and yet
have only flat platitudes to say about it. But if absolutely no features were
given in mystical experiences, there would be nothing retained and nothing
to express or to deny. But from what is retained, some descriptions are more
accurate than their opposites, although the danger remains that, due to the
mirror theory of language, the unenlightened will misunderstand the nature
of the ontologically incommensurate transcendent realities. Still, some
concepts and statements are better or more appropriate in the sense that if
these realities were phenomenal objects, they would be denoted by those
concepts and statements in the same way phenomenal objects are denoted.
For example, transcendent realities are “one” and “real,” not “multiple” or
“apparitions.” So too, if a god exists, it is “personal,” not “nonpersonal” or
“unconscious.” Thus, some descriptions reflect better what was
experienced, but since any “image” is in the same class as images of objects
while transcendent realities are ontologically different, any descriptions of
what was experienced is held to be distortive. For example, Plotinus used
“one” only to contrast the One with multiplicity, but even “the One” only
indicates a lack of plurality, not one object among objects. “One” is used to
start the mind toward simplicity, not to designate one thing among many
phenomenal objects (Enneads 5.5.6), since any property is a characteristic
of the universe’s being, not of the One (the source of being).
       The problem is that all images are formed in the same way while
transcendent and phenomenal realities are ontologically distinct.13 Certainly
any analogy of proportionality—e.g., human goodness is to us as God’s
goodness is to God—reduces a transcendent reality to an unusual but still
phenomenal object, since it would make such a reality in effect an item in
an equation.14 We will always react to any alleged feature in terms of our
normal understanding of things. Such a danger is present when using any
concept or imagery with which we are familiar. God is experienced as a
reality personal in nature, and so some personal imagery is appropriate.15
But using personal images can easily lead to a crude anthropomorphism
(i.e., making a transcendent god into a copy of a human being): we quite
naturally read in features from our own culture and time of what we
consider an ideal human person to be and so end up ascribing our way of
thinking and feeling to God—e.g., he loves what we love and hates what we
hate. Thereby, we end up projecting human qualities without any
experiential basis and end up with an entity that is the product of our
imagination. Any images of a being can lead to other forms of idolatry by
reducing a transcendent reality to a phenomenal reality or by associating
anything worldly with God. Familiar images have to be used, but the danger
is that our attention is directed away from the transcendent referent to the
worldly phenomena of the image itself. So too, the Christian practice of
giving symbolic interpretations to biblical passages may not be an effective
mystical strategy since it may only plant our normal frame of reference
more firmly in our mind: when Eckhart sees Jesus cleansing the temple of
moneychangers as a symbolic statement of cleansing the soul of all images,
listeners will now be thinking in terms of Jesus and the temple. We may
also read too much from a metaphor into a transcendent reality, since the
unenlightened do not have the experience that shows how the metaphor is
used. More generally, the mixture of applicable and inapplicable aspects of
any metaphor to transcendent realities keeps them from being accurate
representations in toto of any such realities.16
      The strategy that mystics employ to avoid this possible reduction of
transcendent realities to phenomenal objects is to maintain that positive
descriptions merely “point to” rather than directly or literally “describe” the
realities. Plotinus said that we can speak of “the One” only to give direction
—to point out the road to others who desire to experience it (Enneads
6.9.4). Shankara says that the positive characterization “truth/reality”
(satya) cannot denote Brahman but can only indirectly indicate it
(Taittiriya-upanishad-bhashya 2.1.1). Words do not properly “describe” or
“signify” Brahman but “imply” it or “direct our attention” toward it (ibid.:
2.4.1, Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.2.21). So too, the word “self” (atman) is
qualified by “as it were” (iti) to indicate that the word does not actually
apply (Taittiriya-upanishad-bhashya 2.1.1, Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-
bhashya 1.4.7). Plotinus likewise noted that we need to add “as if” when
speaking of the One (Enneads 6.8.13). One of Shankara’s disciples,
Sureshvara, said that Brahman is indirectly signified just as the statement
“The beds are crying” indirectly indicates the children who are lying on
them. But he conceded that this type of suggestiveness based on literal
meaning only inadequately implies the self, since whatever is used to refer
to the self becomes confused with it (also see Shankara’s Brahma-sutra-
bhashya 1.2.11, 2.1.17).
      The problem of potential distortion persists whether the positive
features that are ascribed are abstract (e.g., “oneness”) or more relatable
imagery (e.g., God as a shepherd, or the One as a “wellspring”). But both
classes are broadly metaphoric in the sense of using a term with an
established meaning concerning phenomenal objects to direct attention to
something else.17 Even if mystical experiences are quite common,
metaphors are still needed because transcendent realities are ontologically
distinct and so concepts that apply to phenomenal realities must have their
meaning extended to something different. As the medieval English author
of The Cloud of Unknowing wrote concerning the use of spatial terms to
indicate transcendence (“up,” “down,” and so on), the terms are not meant
literally but “as human beings we can go beyond their immediate
significance to grasp the spiritual significance they bear at another level”
(Johnston 1973: 128). Many in philosophy argue that all language is
metaphoric and that metaphors permeate our thought, but the above
mystical passages suggest that these authors assume there is a literal use of
terms in addition to a symbolic use—that calling a man “a lion” is different
from calling a lion “a lion.” That is, these terms have established meanings
and apply literally when phenomenal objects are the referents.
      However, if transcendent realities are ontologically totally distinct
from the phenomenal world, how could anything from the latter realm be
used even symbolically to refer to the former? The answer must be that
mystics see some similarities in the properties of the ontologically
incommensurable realities. For example, God is ontologically
incommensurable with created human beings—to Pseudo-Dionysius the
Areopagite he is beyond (hyper) human nature—but God and human beings
share properties that enable both to be called “personal” or “conscious.”
That is, God is more like our personhood than a nonperson and more like
our consciousness than what is nonconscious. In short, transcendent
realities and worldly phenomena are ontologically disparate in their ontic
natures, but this does not preclude them being alike in some properties.
Without such commonality, there could be no good reason why certain
concepts and images are more appropriate than their opposites or other
images. As the cube and its drawing have some features in common even
though their modes of existence differ, so too some features of the
phenomenal world share properties with transcendent realities and so can be
used to explicate something of transcendent realities. This is why “one,”
“immutable,” and “real” are more applicable than their opposites. God is
“personal” in nature because he is experienced that way, but he is not a
being like a human being is—he is simple and without differentiable
features (thus giving rise to the theological problem of how what is simple
can have numerous properties).18 Otherwise language could not function
even figuratively to refer to something one is not familiar with.
       So too, symbols are not true or false, but any symbols indicating a
source (“ground,” “womb,” “abyss”) are more appropriate and useful than
symbols indicating a product, just as a loving God is more like a “shepherd”
than a “wolf.” Symbols from different cultures and eras will differ and may
change, but the experienced reality would remain the same. And the
problem always is that the unenlightened will construe the terms literally,
and, since they have not had the necessary experiences, they may not be
able to follow them well enough to understand mystical claims about
transcendent realities. Terms we use get their meaning first in applying to
nonmystical realities, but even if some new terms were invented for
referring only to mystical transcendent realities, the unenlightened would
still think in terms of phenomenal realities and the terms could still be used
mystically only by a metaphoric extension. Theists using old terms (“thy”
and “thou”) and arcane word order may point to the otherness of God, but
beyond that this does not help. This problem would occur even if poetry,
music, or nonrepresentational visual art is used: it may open us to
transcendent realities, or our unenlightened mind may still think in terms of
phenomenal realities.