Defending Mystical Discourse
Either claims about realities as experienced by mystics do accurately reflect
something of those realities or nothing can be uttered about them—one
option has to be rejected. But the usual alternatives—rejecting mystics’
claims as nonsense or rejecting language—can both be discarded if the
mirror theory of how language operates is rejected instead. Mystics
apparently believe that what they utter is not in vain. Eckhart closed one of
his sermons saying “Whoever has understood this sermon, good luck to
him! If no one had been here, I should have had to preach it to the offertory
box” (2009: 294). This he would have done to proclaim something that he
felt to be true and of utmost importance. Mystics also find language to be
useful in verifying whether others have had the prescribed experience (by
seeing what they say and how they say it) and in guiding others to having
mystical experiences. The different strategies with regard to language are
meant to direct the unenlightened mind away from the world and toward
beingness or transcendent realities. To modify the Zen analogy, assertions
about mystical realities are more than a finger pointing to the image of the
moon reflected in a pool of water: they are pointing to the moon itself, and
it is only the unenlightened who, like those mistaking the drawing for the
cube, mistake the pointing finger (the words) for the moon. Advaitins claim
that no language can apply to Brahman since all languages involve
distinctions and Brahman is nondual and free of distinctions. But while no
statement can be a substitute for experience, one in a dualistic state of mind
can state such “ultimate truths” as “Brahman is nondual” or “There are no
self-existent entities.” To use an analogy: to know that the statement
“Drinking water quenches thirst” is true, we need to drink water, but, while
the act of drinking “surpasses” that statement, it does not make the
statement only “conventionally true” or make the act of drinking “beyond
language” or an “unstatable higher truth” in any sense other than the
obvious and uncontroversial one that the act of drinking water is not itself a
statement.24 Otherwise, mystics could not say anything about the nature of
reality, because if they use words they would be ipso facto stating only
conventional truths. Thus, mystics would be consigned to silence.
      Because of the concern for possible misunderstanding by the
unenlightened, it may seem that introvertive mystics want things both ways
—that statements and symbols both apply to transcendent realities and do
not apply. But the claims to ineffability are only meant to emphasize the
“wholly other” nature of transcendent realities to the unenlightened, who
may yet misconstrue the nature of the intended realities. So too, with the
rejection of any metaphoric statements based on worldly phenomena:
claims cannot apply positively or negatively to transcendent realities
without unenlightened listeners misconstruing the ontic nature of such
realities.
      The mystical condemnation of language can be seen as an expansion
of the Christian and Jewish prohibitions against creating physical images of
God (Exodus 20:4–6) and the Islamic prohibition against the deification of
anything phenomenal (shirk) to include all mental images. Such idols of the
mind also inhibit having mystical experiences. But if we reject the mirror
theory of how language works, language and everyday symbols can be used
to reveal at least something true of alleged transcendent realities, even if
there must be metaphorical extensions to a new referent and even if we
need the requisite experiences to see why these are accurate or appropriate.
That all claims must be false and language must be rejected and that we
must be resigned to silence is entailed only by accepting the mirror theory.
       However, in trying to show how such claims as “The Godhead is
empty of phenomenal qualities” may be meaningful to the unenlightened,
accurate, and put into words as well as can be expected when dealing with
such an alleged reality, the danger remains that we unenlightened folk will
still think of transcendent realities in terms of unusual objects akin in their
ontic nature to phenomenal objects. Far from aiding in inducing mystical
experiences, focusing on how mystical utterances are intelligible may well
embed conceptualizations more firmly as acceptable to the analytical mind.
If so, this has an antimystical effect, even though mystical discourse must
be intelligible to the unenlightened to be helpful. We are still squarely
entrenched in the realm of language, and, as the Zen adage goes,
“Wordiness and intellection—the more with them, the further we go astray.”
                                       7

                        Mysticism and Rationality