This is a mixture of correct and misleading information—the straight lines
and number of vertices reflect the cube, but the angles are not all 90
degrees, and some edges intersect. More importantly, the drawing distorts
the cube’s basic nature by omitting a third dimension. Being forced to draw
in two dimensions introduces this omission and these inconsistencies, but
there is nothing we can do about it. We might add more detail by shading
some sides, but this will not help since the hypothetical beings still cannot
imagine a third dimension. And any verbal description will sound odd to
someone who has never seen a real cube: “All the angles are really the
same, and it is not ‘flat’ (a term that may have no meaning to these beings),
and the six sides are all the same shape and touch only on the outside.”
     We might even conclude that the cube is ineffable since the drawing
seems to distort what it really is like and changes its nature from three
dimensions to two. But the drawing is in fact an accurate representation as
far as it goes—we simply need to realize that it is only a drawing and that
there is a dimension not conceptualizable in “two-dimensional language”
the way two-dimensional objects are. But most importantly we need the
experience of actually seeing and handling a cube to see how the drawing is
correct. The drawing cannot convey its own flatness: the missing third
dimension cannot be captured by a drawing. Thus, studying the drawing is
no substitute for experiencing a real cube. Those beings who are
sympathetic may come to understand that the drawing is not the cube, and
thus they would not assimilate the drawing to their normal reactions.
Nevertheless, without actually experiencing a cube, they cannot know why
this drawing and not others is appropriate and in what sense it is accurate.
Only with such an experience will the odd and contradictory features be
understood in a nondistortive manner. Without it, the drawing is like M. C.
Escher’s drawing of four waterfalls flowing into each other—something
that can be drawn but cannot correspond to anything in the real world.
      This predicament parallels that of introvertive mystics in one way:
since the unenlightened do not have the requisite experiences, they can do
no more than reduce any talk of transcendent realities to a kind of unusual
phenomenal object. Because of the linguistic “drawings,” transcendent
realities are relegated to the status of a familiar phenomenal object. And
because the “drawings” seem impossible and contradictory, many reject the
possibility that transcendent realities can be real. But just as some of the
features of the cube are captured by the drawing (the six sides, straight
edges, eight vertices, and some angles) and the drawing overall is accurate
if understood properly, so too linguistic descriptions of a transcendent
reality can be accurate if we reject the mirror theory of language: mystical
statements do not falsify, but we need a mystical experience to see properly
how they apply and are correct, and even to understand the claims properly.
Some features of transcendent realities (nonduality, realness, immutability,
transcendence of the phenomenal realm) are accurately conveyed if we
overcome the tendency to project grammar onto reality. This mixture of
correct depictions with distortive possibilities accounts for the mystics’
hesitancy to affirm the adequacy of any conceptualizations of transcendent
realities. Again, the problem is not remedied by introducing a new language
—a different map projection, as it were—since all languages are dualistic
and thus cannot mirror the ontic nature of what is nondual.9
      Having a mystical experience reorients how we understand mystical
cognitive utterances, just as seeing a cube reorients how we see the
drawing. The language is no longer as confusing, but it remains the only
way mystics could convey anything about what was experienced. The ontic
status of transcendent realities is not “captured” by any language, and their
mode of existence would be altered by the unenlightened, but the
enlightened can use language free of the metaphysical mistake to convey
some alleged knowledge of alleged realities, just as we can draw the cube
without being misled by the distortive aspects of the resulting drawing. (If
mystics can see the “drawingness” of their “drawings,” they may become
less attached to the prevailing concepts and symbols of their culture.) And
those without mystical experiences can come to understand something of
what mystics are saying (and even to distinguish accurate descriptions from
inaccurate ones) by following analogies and seeing what is negated. But
without having the experiences the unenlightened’s understanding will
always remain tainted.
     Thus, the mirror theory explains the problem labeled “ineffability.”
The experience is not vague or nebulous—it is a bright light. The problem
of putting what was experienced into words after the experience revolves
around the fact that words will make the reality experienced into a
phenomenal object, which it is not. This leads to the paradox of mystics
denying that language applies to what is experienced and yet continuing to
talk about it. Mystics can acknowledge the “wholly otherness” of what is
experienced and yet can also deny that it “defies expression” if they reject
the mirror theory.10 The language used is as adequate as any denotative
language is if we can reject the mirror theory of how language operates.