“You Are That”
As discussed, a metaphysics of absolute oneness would negate the space
necessary to make a moral concern for another possible. And the Advaita
interpretation of the Upanishads’ metaphysics of tat tvam asi—i.e., “You
are that [Brahman]”—conflicts with the presuppositions of moral practice
that there are real individual persons to be concerned and to be concerned
about, and thus the enlightened in Advaita cannot be moral.11 However,
some scholars have defended this metaphysics as moral. Franklin Edgerton
believed noninjury (ahimsa) is logically deducible from the nondualistic
doctrine of the brahman/atman identity: “we injure ourselves when we
injure others since the Self in each of us is identical” (1942: 155; see also
Radhakrishnan 1948a: 208–209; 1951: 101). Paul Deussen saw this identity
as grounding the Golden Rule: you should love your neighbor as yourself
because you are your neighbor (1966: 49).12 (It should be pointed out that
using “tat tvam asi” to ground ethics is foreign to the classical Indian
tradition and that Hinduism does not have a central ideal of “love your
neighbor” [see Hacker 1995].)
      This position, however, misconstrues the brahman/atman identity in
two ways. First, that “brahman is atman” does not mean that persons (jivas)
in the phenomenal world are identical to each other. There is no identity of
the surface phenomena within the realm of multiplicity like the morning
star being the evening star. The differences within the “dream” remain
intact—if you have a headache, it does not mean I have one in any way.
Different people and objects are not one in that sense: I am not you, but we
emerge from, or in our beingness are identical to, one unchanging
underlying beingness. The separate ego within the “dream” realm that we
normally identify with is not the reality behind all phenomena. That is, the
underlying beingness is singular, but the “dream” phenomena remain
distinct from each other. Thus, harming you (one jiva in the “dream”) does
not mean that I (another jiva) am necessarily harming myself. Second,
under this interpretation, individuals are not real in any sense. What is in
fact real (Brahman) is unharmable no matter what we do (Katha Up. II.18–
19). In no way do you harm the real “you” (brahman/atman) by harming
another phenomenal person (jiva). Conversely, noninjury or compassion is
equally groundless: helping another person (one jiva) does not necessarily
help you (another jiva), and what is real about each of us (brahman/atman)
cannot be helped or affected. In short, there is no reality to help or, by the
same reasoning, any reality that could help. If we accept the source of being
as the only reality, there are no real persons to help. The metaphysics
simply does not permit the existence of another real person to love. So too,
nothing a “dream” self does could even in principle affect what is actually
real: if all that is real is the source, then nothing phenomenal can affect the
root.
      Thus, the moral consequence of the factual claim that the world has the
status of a dream is dire: how we treat other characters in a “dream” is
irrelevant. No actions are morally any better or worse than any others since
nothing real is affected. This can only lead to moral indifference. So too, if
we are all only Brahman, there is no reality separate from ourselves whose
interests we can take into account. Thus, even if I could aid or hurt
Brahman, there would still be no other-regardingness in my actions, but
only the self-interest of helping my true reality. That is, that I should not
harm you because I would thereby be harming myself is not a moral motive
but only prudent “enlightened self-interest.” So too, helping you would only
be helping myself—there is no “other” to help. Thus, as Deussen was
forced to conclude, when the knowledge of Brahman has been gained,
“every action and therefore every moral action has been deprived of
meaning” (1966: 362).
      Indeed, under this metaphysics it is impossible to kill people in this
realm since there are no real people to kill, nor can we even affect what is
truly real. Bhagavad-gita 2.19–21 adopts this view: Krishna tells Arjuna
that no one really slays and no one is really slain—the true self is
unaffectable. He then uses this as one reason why Arjuna should participate
in the war. Shankara also takes the view that Brahman alone is real: all else
is unreal, and there are not obligations for those having enlightened
knowledge (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.1.25; Bhagavad-gita-bhashya 4.10,
18.48). This doctrine did not lead to immoral behavior or antinomianism in
Advaita (contra R. C. Zaehner) but to a nonmoral indifference to everything
in this realm.13 One may engage society or walk off into the forest. At best,
the enlightened quietly go on upholding their orthodox religious duties
(dharma) for the benefit of the world (loka-samgraha-artha) (Brahma-
sutra-bhashya 3.4.50; Bhagavad-gita-bhashya 4.19–20; see Jones 2004:
105–107 for different Advaita options for the enlightened). Only in the
theistic traditions that treat God alone as real has such a doctrine led to the
antinomian conclusion. (Tantrism combines theistic and nontheistic
elements.) Stace dismissed illusionism as an unnecessary component of
mysticism, contrasting it with Christian realism (1960a: 325). But
illusionism is just as natural a correlate of a metaphysics of oneness of our
realm, and it is a more natural correlate of the absoluteness of a
transcendent reality than is realism for this realm. Nevertheless, Stace is
correct insofar as the depth-mystical experience in itself does not require
devaluing the world: the experience can be reconciled with a metaphysics
treating the world as real, such as with Samkhya.
      Using this metaphysics to justify the Golden Rule also has problems.
Loving your neighbor as yourself because you are thereby loving Brahman
in another body presents two problems. First, as already noted, you are not
being other-regarding but simply loving the same reality that is in you.
Second, you are not treating the other person as a real individual but only
loving the underlying beingness and denying the reality of any
phenomenon. In fact, the Golden Rule is harder to reconcile with a sense of
selflessness and a metaphysics of oneness than Stace and others realize:
treating others as I want myself to be treated involves the unenlightened
self-centered point of view of a character in the “dream” realm, i.e.,
projecting what I see as my nonexistent jiva’s interests rather than adopting
the point of view of the transcendent ground. On the other hand, treating
everyone in a way that reflects the transcendent reality (brahman/atman) is
not treating another person (a jiva) as yourself. It would also be fruitless,
since no actions affect what is actually real. So too, if one is trying to
advance the interests of an unchanging transcendent reality, then there
would be nothing about helping the individual needs of another person in
the “dream.” Indeed, seeing everything as a part of myself or in fact as
myself makes the self-interest that is condemned in general in mysticism
central to how we would decide how to act. Instead, we should see reality
free of selves. If selves were involved, the issue of morality versus only
prudent enlightened self-interest would appear here too, but any sense of
self-interest necessary to make the Golden Rule work conflicts with a
mystical sense of selflessness.
              A Metaphysics of Wholeness and Morality
A metaphysics of an interconnected wholeness fares better. One may be
moral with such a view: the parts are real and are not isolated monads that
cannot be affected by our actions, and the reality of the parts permits
concern for the other parts. But just because we are connected does not
require moral concern. It is not inconsistent to try to manipulate other parts
of a connected whole for the advantage of our part: even if the parts are
impermanent and without substance, we can try to manipulate the
configuration of parts that still produces effects to help only our node in the
web at the expanse of other nodes. There may be severe limits to how far
we can twist reality for our particular little fragment’s advantage, but
nothing about the factual claim of a whole rules out all such efforts. We can
even accept that every act within our social or global whole can have
eventual repercussions within the entire universe and thus affects all other
parts without concluding that we must be moral. A value-choice still must
be made. In sum, just because a whole is involved does not answer the
question of morality—Nazis, in giving themselves over to their cause, may
have felt like nodes in an interwoven web that was helping humanity as a
whole, but whether they were moral is another issue.
      In addition, the claim “I should treat you as myself because you are
myself” does not necessarily follow from a metaphysics of wholeness: one
part of the whole may be able to aid or damage another part without aiding
or damaging itself, even if the parts are interconnected. Killing another
being need not mean that we must also be harming ourselves even
minimally at the same time. Indeed, one part may have to be harmed to
maintain the whole, just as we would amputate a cancerous limb to save the
body. Conversely, if the belief in not harming any other part of the whole
did follow from the metaphysical belief, then we could not eat anything,
except perhaps the diet of noncultivated food that the Jainas recommend.
But if we are free to use crops to maintain ourselves, it is not clear that
drawing the line of what one can kill at any point is demanded simply by a
metaphysics of wholeness. How advocates of that view could value sentient
life or life in general over inanimate objects is also not clear, since all are
equal parts of the same whole.
      Mystics who adopt holism may believe that the ground of being
breathes a love of everything and thus that the better value is to work
helping the other parts of reality than to be selfish. Nevertheless, this value-
judgment is not deducible from the belief in the interaction of the parts of
the world and is in fact far from obvious from the violence among animals
exhibited in nature. Holists would have to explain the millions upon
millions of years of evolution that produced animals eating other animals
and such effects as disease-causing viruses that are harmful to us. Our
ecological environment is one whole that reveals not just cooperation and
beneficial symbiotic interrelations but also violence and competition. In
short, life does not appear to be as precious as advocates of holism typically
assert. But how can a sense of a loving source of this world—an all-
encompassing love that makes all life precious—or a sense that everything
in the world is ultimately all right be reconciled with the suffering of
animals and people for millions of years of evolution? Even if the phrase
“life is cheap in this world” is too extreme, we still cannot read love from
nature very easily despite everything forming one whole.
      Daoists think everything is in constant change, and if we remove our
assertive actions from the picture, peace will result; Heraclitus thought all is
in constant change, but strife is the common constant. Either way, a
metaphysics of wholeness can lead to total moral indifference. Just because
there is no substance differentiating us into independent realities does not
mean that we must be concerned with the rest of reality. We can just as
easily conclude that we should let everything proceed without our
interference, paying no special attention to ourselves, our group, human
beings, or sentient beings—any self-assertion or any attempt to help one
part over another would be going against the flow of reality. From the point
of view of the whole, any changes are zero-sum, and so there is no reason to
act or to help one part over another—we are all just different piles of the
same elements of matter in one interconnected whole. This can lead to a
nihilism usually ascribed to naturalists. But the same nihilism can follow
from the factual claim that all of reality is sacred, as Christian antinomians
demonstrated. The whole is what it is, and nothing we can do affects its
well-being. Our acts are irrelevant. Being indifferent in such circumstances
is more in step with reality than being concerned with other parts.
      Similarly, the lack of independent selves does not help. If we believe
that the lack of an independent self to maintain means that we could not
rationally act selfishly (i.e., act to enhance what we know is a nonexistent
ego), then it would be equally true that there are no other selves to help
either, and so we cannot be moral. It is the other side of the same coin.
Consider Buddhist bodhisattvas: if there is no self or any other reality in
themselves to be concerned with, then it is equally true that there is no
comparable reality in others to be concerned with either. So too, preferring
another’s welfare over one’s own is as much attached to a sense of “selves”
as egoism and thus is as unenlightened. (Being concerned exclusively with
others rather than oneself also does not reflect reality, since others are no
more “real” than oneself; to devalue oneself is a value choice.) Conversely,
if there is indeed something real in others to help, then there also is the
same type of reality in ourselves to be selfish about—again, moral concern
does not necessarily follow from the metaphysics. If hate and greed are
impossible because these presuppose an ego and there is none, then it is just
as true that love and compassion are impossible because these presuppose
the same type of realities in others and there are none. That is, if there are
no realities in us to be selfish about, then there also are no realities in others
to help either. In sum, if there is nothing in me whose interests I have to
look out for, then there is nothing in you whose interests I can look out for;
or if there is something in you I have to look out for, then there also is
something in me of the same nature that I could be selfish about. So too,
bodhisattvas could focus on their own suffering alone since the suffering of
every person is equal—indeed, it would be more rational to concentrate on
one’s own suffering since that work can be done more efficiently. But
morality is still compatible with this metaphysics: the conventional “self”
and its components (dharmas) are impermanent and dependent on other
things, but there is still a configuration of components that suffers and can
be led to the end of suffering—there is no need for a metaphysics of an
additional “self-existent self” to enable a moral concern for what is really
there (see Jones 2004: 189–92; 2012b: 192–98). But this metaphysics does
not require morality: Theravada Buddhists have a “selfish” nonmoral ethos
even without espousing a metaphysical “self” (Jones 2004: 149–79). In
short, metaphysics does not dictate an ethics. Bodhisattvas must choose
(ibid.: 192–93), and they do in fact choose the moral option over selfishness
or moral indifference.