Can Nonmystics Judge the Veridicality of Mystical Experiences?
One important preliminary question is whether nonmystics are in a position
to make any judgments about the veridicality of mystical experiences.
Mystics certainly are privileged with regard to the phenomenology of their
experience—anyone is so privileged with regard to his or her own
experiences. But even mystics themselves can evaluate the cognitive import
of their experiences only outside of introvertive experiences in a dualistic
state of consciousness, whether mindful or not, when the mind is aware of
differentiations and can consider different factors. So too, mystics
themselves can assess the role their own mystical experiences play in
justifying their claims only outside introvertive mystical experiences. And
so too, the concrete alleged mystical insights into the true nature of reality
arise as postexperience events occurring outside of introvertive states:
mystics may have experienced a transcendent reality—it is only after
introvertive experiences that mystics see “how things really are.” And all
such evaluations involve more factors than mystical experiences alone.
Even if (contra Kant and constructivists) mystics have direct and
unmediated access to a noumenal reality free of any categories that generate
phenomena and free of our cultural concepts structuring them, what
cognitive significance they see in the experience arises only after the
experience is over.
     In such circumstances, the question of whether either mystical
experiences lead to insights into realities lies outside the phenomenological
accounts of the experiences themselves, and there is no reason that the
mystics themselves should be privileged in the dualistic domain. Merely
having a mystical experience is not grounds in itself for its own veridicality.
Indeed, that a mystical experience is taken to provide an insight at all rather
than producing a delusion depends on factors outside the experience: even a
concept-free depth-experience is not necessarily cognitive—some people
today who have this experience reject it as nothing but a delusion resulting
from an empty mind. Thus, even mystics themselves need arguments for
accepting their own experiences as cognitive as well as for their particular
doctrines.
     Nor is there a need to have mystical experiences to evaluate the basic
philosophical claim that mystical experiences are cognitive: nonmystics can
do the same weighing of factors that mystics must do. Nonmystics can
readily accept that such experiences are genuine, unique neurological
events and that they are cognitively significant and emotionally very
powerful. Even naturalists and the spiritually blind can be sensitive to the
possibility of transcendent realities and accept the sincerity of mystics.
Thus, mystics and nonmystics are in the same position and meet on neutral
ground on this epistemic issue of whether these experiences are cognitive
and hence whether mystics therefore know more of reality than do
nonmystics.
     All of this means that nonmystics are not compelled to accept the
mystics’ own assessment of their experiences. Even if mystics have unique
experiences, they describe their experiences and make doctrinal claims only
once they have returned to a “dualistic” state of consciousness, and in the
end they are not in a privileged position with regard to the justification of
their claims. Being a mystic does not necessarily qualify one to see the
various issues involved in making claims to knowledge. In fact, the strong
emotional impact that mystics often feel from these experiences may make
it harder for them to examine their own experiences and claims critically
and to avoid an unwarranted sense of certainty in their own particular
interpretation of their experiences. Thus, a philosophical examination is
especially important in this field.
      That such evaluations occur in a dualistic state of consciousness is not
elevating ordinary consciousness above mystical states in matters of
cognition. It merely recognizes that mystics too make the judgment of the
cognitive value of mystical insights in dualistic consciousness—one may
still conclude that mystical experiences offer greater insights than ordinary
consciousness. Nor do such judgments reduce mystical knowledge-claims
to ordinary claims about natural objects made in intentional consciousness
apart from contemplative states (although philosophers do routinely treat all
mystics’ knowledge-claims as if they are propositions about sense-
experience and ordinary objects in the universe). Evaluations might be
different in certain altered states of consciousness, but even mystics must
make their judgments about the status of those altered states in ordinary
consciousness. That is, during an altered state of consciousness the
experiences may be so overwhelming that one may be absolutely certain
that one has experienced a reality or that one’s doctrines are true, but it is in
the ordinary baseline state of consciousness that one is confronted by
challenges to such claims and must evaluate alternatives, and thus such
certainty cannot be maintained.
      Thus, there does not appear to be any reason to deny nonmystics the
right to evaluate the cognitive status of mystical experiences. Having an
experience is one thing; evaluating its significance is another. That
interpretations of these experiences conflict among mystics themselves only
highlights the situation.2 Thus, mystics cannot simply say “Sorry, we’ve
had the experiences, and you have not” when it comes to the cognitive
status of their claims. The justification or warrant for the claim to have had
a mystical experience may be internal to a person, but justification for the
experience being cognitive or for a specific doctrine is external.
                  What Can Mystics Claim to Know?
Thus, we can proceed, and the next question is what exactly mystics can
claim to know. Do introvertive mystical experiences offer a credible case
for mystics gaining knowledge of transcendent realities in general? Or of a
transcendent reality of a specific nature? Mystics typically do not
tentatively set forth what they believe they have experienced. But mystical
experiences give knowledge only in the context of wider systems of
thought, and mystics provide “thick” descriptions of what they know about
reality in terms of their system, not “thin” phenomenological depictions of
their experiences. That is, mystics give highly ramified depictions of what
they know through their experiences, and certainty is a general
characteristic of traditional mystics. Theistic mystics typically are not
skeptical or agnostic about the existence of God or their experiences of him;
rather, they have an unshakeable conviction. Traditional mystics in general
tend to be naive realists about their claims, and if they are aware of
competing interpretations they argue that such interpretations are clearly
wrong. But to hold that one account gives a description of the content of a
mystical experience without any interpretive elements will depend on wider
ontic and conceptual commitments. And this leads to the question of what
knowledge-claims the experiences actually justify.
      Consider some examples. Does a depth-mystical experience confirm
Advaita’s view of a fundamental consciousness that is the only reality in all
phenomena, or does it confirm Samkhya’s view of multiple centers of
consciousness? Or does it confirm no more than that there is a natural state
of pure consciousness? Do differentiated introvertive experiences confirm
the Buddhists’ typology of inner states, or the Samkhyas’? Do they conflict
with the extrovertive Buddhist view that consciousness is a series of
temporary conditioned events? Are theistic introvertive experiences of a
trinitarian god of Christianity, or of the simpler divine unity of the one-
person god of Judaism and Islam, or of the more immanent god of
Ramanuja, or of just a generic personal “source”? Do depth-mystical
experiences confirm any of these theistic views? How do we decide
between accepting a Buddhist meditator’s discovery “based on their first-
hand experiences” that there is no soul or a Christian or Hindu
contemplative’s claim that through “repeated experiments” that were
“verified” by their meditative experiences that in fact there is an eternal
soul beneath the fleeting apparitions of the personality (McMahan 2008:
210)? Are all interpretations merely speculative “over-beliefs,” as William
James called them (1958: 387–88), that are in no way justified by the
experiences?
      The lack of third-party checking of mystical claims is an issue here.3
When it comes to conflicting claims involving sense-experience, others can
test the credibility of the evidence for our claims. No such procedure is
possible for mystics’ claims: unlike sense-objects, no transcendent reality
can be presented for checking by others, and any new mystical experiences
would be taken only as confirming the experiencer’s own tradition’s claims.
For this reason, naturalists rule out introvertive mystical experiences as
possibly cognitive—what is experienced is deemed an hallucination since it
cannot be seen, touched, or otherwise sensed by others. We cannot even tell
if experiences by different persons have anything “objective” in common.
Of course, no one’s inner experiences can be presented for others to see, but
in the case of, say, astronomical observations, others can look into the
telescope and confirm (if trained) an observation or disconfirm it.4 Masters
in meditative traditions may have tests to determine if a practitioner is
enlightened, but from the scientific point of view those tests are still indirect
and subjective; at most they can confirm that an experience occurred, but
they cannot confirm that the tradition’s doctrinal interpretation is correct.
The judgment of whether this lack of third-party checking rules out the
possibility of mystical experiences being cognitive depends on whether one
believes the standards of science apply to all cognitive claims. Obviously,
this is a basic conflict between naturalist and traditional religious points of
view.5
      This might be less of a problem if there were one agreed-on
interpretation of the transcendent realities allegedly experienced from the
different mystical traditions of the world, but there is no convergence of the
diverse conflicting doctrines and none is in sight. So too, there do not
appear to be any neutral criteria to adjudicate the disputes between mystical
interpretations (as discussed below). There are theistic and nontheistic
monisms and dualisms, each supported by different mystics. As just noted,
Abrahamic theists are split. In theisms, there is also the problem that the
depth-mystical experience has been interpreted as either an experience of
God or the experience of only the root of the self. Of course, religious
theorists within any tradition will be able to advance reasons to prefer one
interpretation over others, but equally obviously members of other
traditions with other basic beliefs will most likely remain unconvinced and
will offer their own reasons for other positions.
      It is because mystical experiences are not self-interpreting that they are
open to being seen as supporting these diverse claims. However, this has
one major consequence: even the mystics themselves are not justified by
their experiences alone in accepting their mystical experiences as
conclusive confirmation of their tradition’s doctrines. Shankara appealed to
the Vedas. Martin Buber interpreted his experiences against orthodox
Jewish beliefs. But can introvertive mystics at least offer their experience as
some evidence that they have experienced some transcendent reality? They
sense something as overwhelmingly more real when compared to what is
experienced in ordinary consciousness. But two points present problems.
      First, the mystics’ certainty is in their tradition’s doctrines, not in the
abstract claim that some transcendent reality exists. Even if mystics do
experience the same transcendent reality or the depth of the self, the fact
remains that each mystic typically thinks that his or her doctrine (and thus
doctrines in other traditions that concur with it) is the “best” or “least
inadequate” understanding of the nature of what is experienced and that any
conflicting doctrine is inadequate. Certainty that at least some transcendent
reality was experienced might count as evidence if all mystics agreed on an
interpretation of the nature of what was experienced. But the diversity of
understandings precludes this. And if the mystics’ certitude here is
misplaced, they may also be mistaken in the entailed claim that they
experienced a transcendent reality. Even if an experiencer has no doubts
about his or her interpretation, the resulting certainty is simply irrelevant to
the cognitive issue when there are competing claims. No matter how
powerful the experience may have been to an experiencer, this does not
exempt the experiencer from the possibility of error concerning the status
and nature of what was experienced. Like the prisoner from Plato’s cave
who mistook the sun in all its dazzling splendor to be the author of the
universe, mystics may make mistakes in their doctrinal conclusions.
      Second, most mystics have an absolute and unflinching certainty after
the event that the experiences convey the sense of something real—that
what was experienced is not a delusion or dream. Any sense of certainty
during the experience may be explained away by the lack of activity of the
brain’s critical faculties, but the persisting sense of certainty after the
experience must also be explained. For example, experiencers of drug-
induced experiences can differentiate some obviously wrong beliefs (e.g.,
“The entire universe is pervaded by a strong odor of turpentine”) that
seemed certain at the time of the experience from other certainties (Smith
2000: 65). Mystics appear certain that no experience could undercut the
vivid sense of fundamental reality. However, some experiencers think their
experiences are delusions and only result from natural states of the mind.
And naturalists can still claim that mystics are mistaken: the experiences
may well overwhelm mystics, but they are only a natural event resulting
from the brain being emptied of all differentiable content. The character of
the depth-mystical experience would be the same whether a transcendent
reality or merely the natural mind is experienced (since it is empty of
differentiated content), and it is the postexperience evaluation of what is
experienced that determines the emotional impact the experience has on a
mystic’s life.
      As discussed in the next chapter, naturalists’ explanations do not refute
transcendent explanations, but they offer a credible alternative to religious
explanations. In such circumstances, how can mystics justify any claims to
have experienced a transcendent reality without advancing an independent
argument? Mystical experiences per se do not seem capable of resolving the
naturalist versus transcendent dispute—i.e., that only sense-experience
combined with reason can discover truths about reality versus seeing
naturalism as grounded, in William James’s words, in the “baseless
prejudice” of supposing that sensory awareness is the only vehicle of
awareness of reality. Even if introvertive mystics have direct, unmediated
access to a noumenon and the content of the experience has an impact on
their later beliefs, how can they be certain that that is so? How can theistic
mystics be sure, in the words of the “Letter of Private Counsel,” that they
have “seen and felt … God as he is in himself”? The claim is about
something real apart from the state of mind. When I have a pain, I may be
certain I have a pain, but that is not a claim about reality apart from my
state of mind or its causes. A mystical experience is self-validating as a
state of consciousness, but how can mystics be certain about the state of
affairs apart from their state of consciousness (e.g., its causes)?
      Naturalists point to the diversity in the interpretations of mystical
realities occurring in mystical traditions from around the world and
throughout history as an indication that no reality is actually experienced.
But that does not follow: it only shows that postexperience ideas conflict—
competing interpretations do not rule out the possibility that introvertive
mystics in fact experience some transcendent reality, or rule out that one
account may be the best possible. At most, all that follows is that even
mystics cannot know the nature of any transcendent reality that they
experience. And this would mean that the mystics’ certainty in the highly
ramified conceptions and doctrines that they advance to close off some
mystery is misplaced: it may be that many—perhaps most or even all—
mystics misinterpret their introvertive experiences and thus are wrong.
There may be a common element to all introvertive mystical accounts—
e.g., a profound sense of a direct, unmediated experience of a nondual and
fundamental reality—that transcends cultures, but there is no simple,
neutral account of the full nature of that reality.
      Nor is there any empirical way to test mystics’ claims. Even if the
experiences are reproducible by the same experiencer or by others through
training, and even if meditation masters can devise tests to determine if a
student has achieved enlightenment or have had the same experiences they
have had, these procedures do not establish the veridicality of the
experience—even some optical illusions, such as mirages, are public. Nor
could this procedure test the ontic claims of the tradition’s account of
transcendent realities against competing claims or against naturalists’
reductions. As already noted, tests for duplicating first-person experiences
will test only their occurrence, not the resulting doctrines: since any
transcendent realities cannot be presented for examination by others, the
different interpretations cannot be tested in an intersubjective manner. Nor
would any mystical experience falsify a doctrine, since the experiencer
would always interpret the experience as confirming his or her tradition’s
doctrines even if those doctrines must be modified or reinterpreted to
accommodate the new alleged experiential insights. Nor do nonmystical
experiences bear on claims about the beingness of the phenomenal natural
realm or the possible existence of transcendent realities. In short, there is no
empirical way to check mystical implicit or explicit ontic claims. Any
support for such claims will have to come from other sources.
      Thus, mystical doctrines may be revisable by nonexperiential sources,
but there is no fresh experiential input to challenge them. In explaining new
phenomena in science, there may be an initial diversity of conflicting
theories, but scientists can test the interpretations against new experiential
input and with generally agreed-on criteria for selecting the better theory;
thus, eventually a consensus usually arises. But in mysticism there is no
empirical way to test the interpretations, and no cross-cultural set of criteria
for determining the best interpretation (as discussed below). Mystics do not
engage the transcendent the way scientists engage the world: there are no
experiments or other input from new experiences as time goes on. There are
no new, genuinely novel depth-mystical experiences to challenge or correct
previous mystical conceptions or otherwise test the various interpretations,
but simply the same “pure consciousness” event empty of differentiated
content recurring over and over again; if it is truly devoid of differentiable
content, the experience remains the same each time for every experiencer
throughout the world. So too for theistic mystical claims. The Abrahamic
theists’ views of the nature of God have evolved over the last 3,000 years.
Arguably, introvertive mystical experiences contributed to this process in
the past. But these experiences can no longer offer fresh input for any future
theological revisions, since theistic introvertive experiences offer no more
than “the presence of a loving reality”—new information is not given in
these experiences, as with alleged revelations. Mystics, in short, are not
learning more about transcendent realities (if they exist) that could help
resolve any of the disputes.