Nagarjuna’s Reasoning
Scholars are across the board on the relation of Nagarjuna’s arguments to
logic—he is seen as doing everything from not understanding logic to
denying logic altogether to advancing a new three-valued logic. Was he
“obviously and profoundly distrustful of logic” (Huntington 2007: 111)?
Did he reject the law of the excluded middle (Staal 1975: 39)? Did not his
denial of one position logically commit Nagarjuna to holding the opposite
position (which he also denies)? Did he “use logic to destroy logic”? Was
he simply inconsistent or irrational—e.g., both affirming and denying the
existence of entities, or claiming that what is dependently arisen cannot
arise, or contradicting himself by resorting to a view to destroy all views?
But the antirationalist position does not survive an examination of
Nagarjuna’s works and the total context of each of his remarks. Nor is there
anything in any of his works that suggests that he relegated rationality to the
conventional level of truths or introduced a new multivalued logic. In fact,
it appears from the structure of his arguments that he did not violate any of
the basic laws of logic, nor was he in any other way irrational. In effect, in a
reversal of what Parmenides used logic to do, Nagarjuna used reason to
show that permanence is impossible and that all is changing, and he did so
in an eminently rational way, including implicitly relying on both the law of
the excluded middle and the law of noncontradiction.
      Like most traditional people but unlike modern Western philosophers,
Nagarjuna spoke of a conflict of properties, not statements—i.e., he said
that something cannot be or have properties x and not-x or that x and not-x
cannot be in the same place at the same time, not anything about the
relation of statements. His focus was on the world, not the logic of
statements. Many of Nagarjuna’s arguments proceed on the basis that x and
not-x are mutually exclusive and that there is no third possibility. For
example, he used the law of the noncontradiction in Mula-madhyamaka-
karikas (“MK”) 8.7: “ ‘Real’ and ‘unreal’ are opposed to each other—how
could they exist together simultaneously?” (see also MK 7.30, 21.3, 25.17,
25.25–27). An entity (bhava) and its absence (abhava) cannot exist together
(MK 25.14). So too, he utilizes the law of the excluded middle: “A mover is
not stationary, just as a nonmover is not stationary. And other than a mover
or a nonmover, what third possibility is stationary?” (MK 2.15; see also MK
1.4, 2.8, 3.6, 4.6, 6.10, 8.1, 21.14).26 Indeed, Nagarjuna’s basic method of
arguing fails if the contrast between x and not-x is not exclusive and
exhaustive since his conclusion of emptiness (shunyata) as the only
alternative to a world of self-existence (svabhava) would then not follow.
So too, if Nagarjuna accepted that contradictions could state a truth, as Jay
Garfield and Graham Priest (2003) contend, then again his argument would
fail since the contradictions again would not be grounds to accept
emptiness. That is, the only way Nagarjuna gets to emptiness is to eliminate
self-existence, since he rejects advancing any independent positive
arguments for emptiness, and so he has to remove all logical possibilities
for self-existence—if a contradiction concerning self-existence affirms a
truth, his arguments collapse.
      Nagarjuna also employed the simplest form of an inference,
recognized in the West as modus ponens (e.g., MK 19.6):

     (1) If A, then B;
     (2) A;
     (3) Therefore, B.

He also used the more complex modus tollens (e.g., MK 24.24, 27.7):

     (1) If A, then B;
     (2) Not B;
     (3) Therefore, not A.

For example, if (A) there were self-existence, then (B) there would be no
change (since change of any kind is impossible for what is self-existent and
thus permanent); but (not B) we see change; and so, (not A) there is no self-
existence. Such reasoning is a staple of Western philosophy and logic.
      But Richard Robinson thought that Nagarjuna violated one law of
logic (1957: 297). Verse 13.7 of the Karikas reads: “If there were anything
at all that is not empty, then there would be found something we can call
‘empty.’ However, there is found nothing that is nonempty—how then can
there be the ‘empty’?” This and other verses of the same form (MK 10.7,
7.17) can be interpreted as violating the law of contraposition or the fallacy
of the antecedent. It has this logical form:

     (1) If A, then B;
     (2) Not A;
     (3) Therefore, not B.

It has the same logical form as “If it is sunny today, it is not raining; it is not
sunny today; therefore, it must be raining.” Obviously this is wrong—it can
be cloudy but not raining. However, Nagarjuna’s verse can also be given a
reading that does not violate logic: only something real (i.e., self-existent)
exists and thus could in principle be empty; and since there is in fact
nothing self-existent, there is no reality that could be empty. That is, the
first line states a necessary requirement: for something to be empty, it must
first be real—otherwise, there is nothing existent to be empty. Hence,
premise (1) would read: “Only if A, then B.” (Sanskrit does not have a form
to distinguish “if” from “only if.”) The conclusion then does logically
follow: “If A is necessary for B, and there is no A, then there can be no B.”
If so, the verse does not have the fallacious type of inference and does not
violate any law of reasoning. In fact, it is a very rational approach.
     Nagarjuna also used another form of inference to make a point (MK
4.4, 13.4, 15.9, 20.1–2, 20.21, 21.9, 25.1–2, 27.21, 27.23–24).27 The form
is:

     (1) If A, then not B.
     (2) If not-A, then not-B.