Mystical Experiences and Mystical Ways of Life
While the different mystical traditions of the world can be grouped together
under the rubric “mysticism” because of the centrality of similar
experiences, it must be remembered that there is no generic “mysticism” or
“mystical worldview,” but only particular mystics in particular mystical
traditions with concrete beliefs about realities, concrete goals, and concrete
practices. To invert a George Santayana remark, any attempt to have a
religion that is no religion in particular is as hopeless as any attempt to
speak without speaking some particular language (1905: 5). And the same
applies to mysticism: there is no one abstract “mysticism,” but only
particular mystics and mystical traditions. We can still speak of
“mysticism,” just as linguists speak of “language” in general, and we can
discuss its general features (if any commonalities among the phenomena are
found), just as linguists speak of the nature of language, but we must
remember there are only specific evolving traditions, and each mystic must
be understood in his or her cultural context. In addition, classical mysticism
was part of different religious traditions and must be understood in that
context.8 Mystics think of themselves as Christians or Shaivaites or
whatever, not as “mystics.” They practice Christianity or whatever, not
“mysticism.” In Buddhism, the goal of the way of life is to end our
suffering by escaping the cycle of rebirth—something Abrahamic mystics
do not even consider. The different traditions’ particular beliefs and
practices are not merely vehicles to one universal goal any more than
specific languages are merely attempts to voice “language” in the abstract.
Even “perennial philosophy” as a mystical Esperanto is still only one
particular “language.”
      Moreover, the world’s religious traditions are made up of multiple
subtraditions that have evolved throughout history. No religion’s mystical
tradition is monolithic: there is no one uniform “Christian mysticism” but
different Christian forms of mysticism. Not all of Hinduism can be reduced
to Advaita or to Vaishnava theism, let alone all Asian traditions to one
abstract “Eastern mysticism.” The religious concepts and values—the
conceptions of transcendent realities, the rewards and punishments, the
ethical norms—within these subtraditions may not remain constant but
change throughout history. There are variations and exceptions in every
religious tradition. Different mystical groups within the same religion often
disagree over doctrines and practices. (Buddhism first split over monastic
rules, not doctrines.) Some doctrines may be common to most schools and
may be “official” to, say, all of Buddhism, but the total configurations of all
the beliefs of each school lead to significant differences and disputes. Nor is
any mystical tradition “pure”: there are nonmystical influences and cross-
fertilization from other religions.
      Nevertheless, all religions have mystical traditions: any religious
tradition can accommodate mystics to one degree or another. The influence
of mystical experiences on religious doctrines is especially great in many
Asian religions. But even with a mainstream view of the absolute otherness
of God, the Abrahamic traditions all have had vibrant mystical traditions.
Indeed, a scholar of Judaism, Brian Lancaster, can say, “There is effectively
no such thing as ‘nonmystical Judaism’ ” (2005: 14). In the Abrahamic
traditions, salvation is not a matter of mystical experiences, as in most
Buddhist and Hindu traditions, but many Christians see mystics as living
the Christian life to the fullest. Mystics also influence the doctrines of all
traditions. Many are orthodox—in Christianity, 10 percent of medieval
saints are mystics and another 10 percent are ascetics (Kroll & Bachrach
2005: 203). Indeed, a very strong case can be made that many Christian
beliefs are merely mystical doctrines formulated dogmatically (Louth 1981:
xi).
      However, many mystics are in tension with the established tradition of
their time: some react to the apparent worldliness of the faithful; some (e.g.,
women) present a challenge to the power or authority of those in charge or
the accepted roles in society. Some, including Eckhart, were considered
heretical—Marguerite Porete was burned at the stake. Many Protestants,
following Martin Luther, oppose the very idea that God can be experienced
directly or united with in any way, or that there is a spark of the divine in
human beings, or that God can ever be immanent—God remains wholly
transcendent. That is, even if there is a transcendent reality, it may not be
open to any experience. Thus, most Protestants see all mysticism as
inherently anti-Christian. Many have other complaints: they see mysticism
as tainted by the heresy of Gnosticism, overstressing the nonrational in
religion (Otto 1958: 22), pantheistic, self-denying, not sufficiently
prophetic, or escapist rather than socially engaged. In the end, many theists
agree with G. K. Chesterton’s disparagement of “mysticism” as “starting in
mist, ending in schism, with an ‘I’ in the middle.”
      In any case, mystical experiences are not tied to any particular set of
beliefs or a particular religion but occur in all traditions. And some
postexperience interpretation must be present even for the mystics
themselves to understand the significance of the mystical experience.9 What
is important here is that the experience alone does not determine its own
interpretation. The experience itself is only one consideration: the doctrines
and practices of a given mystic’s tradition all play a role. Mystical
experiences may well affect the mystic’s worldview or ethos, but the
process of seeing the significance of the experience occurs only outside of
introvertive mystical experiences in a dualistic consciousness, whether
mindful or not. Some interpretation must always be given to the experience
to integrate it into the person’s life, whether the mystical experience occurs
spontaneously or occurs to those who have been practicing in a particular
tradition. An interpretation may in fact be ready-made by the mystic’s own
tradition prior to the experiences, but those outside of any tradition will also
need to work with their prior religious and philosophical beliefs to
understand the significance of the experience.10
      That mystics are aware of their tradition’s interpretation prior to their
experiences raises the issue of what is more important in the final claim to
mystical knowledge—the content of the mystical experiences themselves or
the beliefs and values of a mystic’s tradition. Are introvertive mystical
experiences noncognitive in that, even if an awareness of a transcendent
reality is involved, the knowledge-claims themselves come only from other
sources? That these experiences may adjust a mystic’s understanding of his
or her tradition’s doctrines complicates the situation. In the end, mystical
ideas of oneness, immutability, and so on figure in the generation of the
doctrines of different religions, no matter how unmystical the orthodox
doctrines might become if theory and spirituality grow apart. But
disentangling mystical and unmystical influences may prove difficult.
(Mysticism may also influence more purely philosophical circles, as in the
case of later Platonism.)
      All of this means that mystical experiences alone do not determine a
mystic’s knowledge-claims. How an introvertive mystical experience fits
into a worldview depends on what mystics decide its significance is while
outside the experience, and this depends on religious, philosophical, and
other considerations that encompass more than the experiences themselves.
Thus, mystical knowledge will always have a conceptual element that
mystics supply outside the experiences. This in turn means that ideas from
the mystic’s tradition will always play a necessary role in how the mystical
experience is seen and in what is taken to be mystical knowledge. Advaitins
will have to offer reasons other than the depth-mystical experience itself to
conclude that the world is “unreal” in any sense whatsoever, and theists will
have to offer reasons for treating revelation or theistic mystical experiences
as fundamental in interpreting the significance of the depth-mystical
experience. But in all cases, factors outside mystical experiences
themselves are a necessary part of the picture.
      In sum, mystical experiences only in the context of a mystic’s
encompassing mystical ways of life allegedly give knowledge. But even if
mystical experiences affect the mystic’s worldview, judgments of the
significance of a mystical experience nevertheless can occur only outside of
introvertive mystical experiences in a dualistic state of consciousness when
the experience itself becomes an object of intentional consciousness. In this
way, the actual knowledge that is allegedly gained in the depth-mystical
experience will involve elements of the mystic’s beliefs outside the
experience itself. Mystical experiences are sometimes considered
“preconceptual apprehensions,” but mystics claim to know what they
experienced, and such knowledge occurs only outside the depth-mystical
state. The experiences may be incorrigible, but the post-experience
understanding of them is not. The depth-mystical experience remains
constant (if constructivism is wrong), and it is the various understandings
and valuations that become distinct to each mystical tradition that must be
studied in religious studies.