Rationality and Styles of Reasoning
Most works by mystics, like most writings, do not contain developed
arguments. Many are works of poetry. But mystics can write books of
argument if the occasion calls for it, as shown by Shankara’s commentaries
on the basic Hindu texts in which he takes on various opponents. In
classical mystical traditions, appeal is often made to authoritative religious
texts; this does undercut rationality since rationality is associated with first-
hand experiences and reasoning, but it does not go so far as to make
mystics’ reasoning irrational or illogical in structure. (It should be noted
that mystical experiences are not considered means to “correct knowledge”
in most Indian mystical schools, and as noted earlier, mystics in general do
not appeal to their own experiences in arguments.) The important point here
is that when mystics do construct arguments they do not defy logic. India
also has a tradition of debates (vadas) over religious and related
philosophical matters that includes pointing out alleged logical
inconsistencies and conflicts with ordinary experiences in the doctrines of
opponents (see Motilal 1998). (And it must be admitted that in the past such
debates often included contests of miracle-working.) Buddhists such as
Nagarjuna valued logical consistency and utilized such sophisticated
arguments as reductio ad absurdum and the problem of infinite regression
that rely on the law of noncontradiction to draw out logical inconsistencies.
Thus, although the process of reasoning conflicts with actually having
introvertive mystical experience at the same time and would at least
interfere with receptivity in extrovertive mystical experiences, outside those
experiences some mystics, as part of their mystical way of life, have written
works advancing arguments for their understanding of what is experienced
and against their opponents’ views that are logical in form.
      But mystics are not typically trained in Aristotelian logic, although
logic was part of the medieval Christian and Muslim curricula. Mystics will
also use the styles of arguing and forms of formal presentation that are
particular to their culture and era. The physical environment we have
evolved in shapes our thinking and what we all consider real and
reasonable; we all may also have evolved certain innate structures in our
psyche. But cultures also shape what we consider reasonable and what
styles of reasoning we adopt.5 If the social psychologist Richard Nisbett is
correct, there is a basic difference between Western and East Asian ways of
understanding and perceiving the natural world (2003). He is not saying
that everyone in a given culture thinks the same way, but only that there are
general cultural patterns of thinking: Westerners typically engage in
“analytical thinking” that involves detaching an object from its context and
categorizing objects by their attributes, whereas East Asians typically
engage in “holistic thinking” that involves an orientation to context and
environments as a whole. Analytical thinkers explain and predict in terms
of rules governing an object’s attributes; holistic thinkers explain and
predict in terms of the relation of an object to its context and to other
objects. The former utilize chronological and historical relationships; the
latter, causal patterns. The former are drawn to objects; the latter, to a
perceptual field as a whole. The former decontextualize an object and
manipulate its environment; the latter adjust themselves to their
environment. The former try to understand the whole by how the parts
work; the latter understand the parts by starting with the whole. The former
see a logical contradiction between true and false; the latter see some merit
on both sides and look for a middle way between them. The former
naturally see distinct objects; the latter see a common substance. The
former look for causes and agents; the latter, for relationships. The former
come up with models simplifying how things work by removing things
from their environment; the latter accept the complexity of the world.
Western thinking fed Greek curiosity about how the world works and led
naturally to the development of science; the latter are exemplified in
Daoism and Zen. (Note that Nisbett does not place the origin of the holistic
approach in mystical experiences or tie it in any way to such experiences.6)
      There may be such broad cultural differences in how different people
think and perceive particular to each culture.7 Such differences in outlooks
would affect the premises and reasons in arguments. Moreover, every
person may employ unique mental steps in his or her own reasoning. But
the issue for rationality comes down to whether mystics must reject the
basic rules of logic in how they reason. And they do not appear to do so.
The early Buddhist Points of Contention (Kathavatthu) and Questions of
King Milinda (Milindapanha) are good examples. In the latter, the questions
posed by the Greek-influenced king often reflect a concern that Buddhist
claims directly violate the law of noncontradiction. Questions are posed in
the form of two-prong dilemmas, and the Buddhist monk Nagasena’s
answers are implicitly based on the basic rules of logic. For example, he
reconciled the apparently conflicting claims that the Buddha had no
teachers and had five teachers by asserting that the Buddha did have
teachers but none instructed the enlightening knowledge and thus he had no
teacher of that (Mlp 235–36). Nagasena relied on similes in his arguments.
That points to a difference in the style of argument, but many passages
implicitly involve the law of the excluded middle in the form “If x, then y;
if not-x, then not-y.” The arguments implicitly accept that these two options
exhaust all the possibilities. We may not find all the reconciliations
convincing—there is often no good reason to believe that arguments based
on analogies or similes illuminate the subject being explained. But this is
not to deny the logical structure of the arguments. The questions reveal an
awareness of logically problematic aspects of mystical claims, and the
answers reveal a rational response to them. Nothing in that text exhibits an
“alternative logic” or cannot be explained to be logical.8 We may not agree
with their premises, but the form of the arguments is logical by Western
standards. Similarly, the Daoist Zhuangzi is not, as is often alleged, being
“antirational” or “anti-intellectual” in using reason to show that reasoning
cannot establish one limited point of view as absolute, universal, or
otherwise uniquely grounded in reality. John of the Cross represented more
than Christian mystics when he said in Ascent of Mount Carmel that “all
matters must be regulated by reason save those of faith, which, though not
contrary to reason, transcend it” (2.22.13).9 He also repeatedly used the
principle that two contraries cannot coexist in the same subject (e.g., ibid.:
1.4.2). Or as Abu Hamid al-Ghazali said, “Reason is God’s scale on earth.”
So too, a “love” mystic such as Hadewijch of Antwerp can value reason as
a “gift from God” and claim that “reason never deceives” while still
claiming that the limited reason-guided life of virtue must be transcended.10
      One Buddhist strategy that is regularly cited as a rejection of two-
valued logic is the “four options” (catush-koti).11 It came up when the
Buddha tried to remain silent to persistent questioning but finally responded
by rejecting any answer to certain questions (such as whether the universe
is eternal or not), claiming that none “fit the case” (upeti)—even though the
options exhaust all the logical possibilities. Thus, to the question of whether
the enlightened exist after death or not, the Buddha rejected as “Not so”
(ma h’evam) the four options that the enlightened exists, does not exist,
both exists and does not exist, and neither exists nor does not exist
(Majjhima Nikaya 1.485–87, 2.166).12 This appears clearly to violate the
law of noncontradiction, and numerous attempts have been made to show
that it does not. But the reason that all four options are rejected is simple:
when all factors of the phenomenal world (dharmas) are removed at death,
there is no means of knowledge and thus no means of description (Sutta
Nipata 1075–76). We might affirm the second option that the enlightened
do not exist after death at least as the factors of the world do, but because of
the mirror theory of language, an unenlightened listener might take any
affirmative answer as referring to a “real” entity that exists or does not exist
after death, and so the second option also must be denied. This style of
argument is not irrational since it is perfectly reasonable for the Buddha to
assume (under the thrall of the mirror theory of language) that any
affirmative answer would be misleading because to describe x by predicate
y or by the denial of y would still lead the listener to think in terms of y
when y in fact does not apply and there is no real x.13 (More on this below.)