“Beyond Good and Evil”
The enlightened state is the state of awareness achieved through mystical
practices where one is free of the sense of self and all conceptual
dichotomies of “real” entities. The enlightened have the inner
transformation that mystics deem central, not merely isolated experiences.
The enlightened now, in Eckhart’s phrase, live “without a why” (sunder
Warumbe), i.e., without a personal purpose or benefit or even a command
from God—“I live because I live” (2009: 129, 239, 332). Works are now
performed from their transcendent “ground,” and nothing contingent or
outward prompts their actions; the enlightened have no motive for
themselves and seek nothing in their works; they are dead to all
phenomenal things and are themselves reduced to nothing (ibid.: 305–6).
The emotional reaction in the enlightened state to an action’s effect on
oneself is even-mindedness or “detachment”—i.e., freedom from personal
desires or motives or anger and stress, an indifference to what happens next
to oneself or to what direction one’s life goes in, and no personal
attachment to any outcome. (Thus, it is better to call this “personal
nonattachment” rather than “detachment,” since the latter suggests being
detached from the consequences of their actions toward others or from the
world in general.) For theists, one is steadfastly attached to God, remaining
the same through the good and the bad. To Eckhart, detached love has no
reason to act, not goodness or even God—one desires nothing and is not
inclined toward oneself or the person one is helping (ibid.: 99–100, 110).
One does not prefer oneself or one’s parents over others (ibid.: 135). The
coldness of detachment is demonstrated in Eckhart’s remark that if the “son
of God” is born in him, then “the sight of my father and all my friends slain
before my eyes would leave my heart untouched” (ibid.: 75). One is
dispassionate to success or failure, pleasure or pain. One has no fear of
death, nor any desire for it. There is nothing to do or fear. The enlightened
live focused totally on the present moment—calm, free of expectations and
hope for the future and remorse for past decisions and actions, and free of
doubts and anxieties.
      However, mystical enlightenment in itself gives no new values.
Mystical selflessness does not determine whether one is moral or not and
what actions should be carried out, but it affects how one acts: being
detached from the results, expecting nothing, unconcerned with the
opinions of others, and focused only on the present, one’s behavior becomes
more spontaneous, effortless, and efficient (see Jones 2004: 310–14). Only
that may make mystics recognizable by their behavior and distinguish them
from the unenlightened in their tradition. Eckhart’s detachment
(abegeschiedenheit) from both images and emotional attachments and
letting God be God in oneself (gelazenheit), the Bhagavad-gita’s karma-
yoga, and the Daoist’s action free from personal striving (wuwei) all involve
acting in accord with reality (as defined by a mystic’s tradition) and without
a personal will interfering with the will of God or the course of natural
events. It is more a way of being than a matter of doing since one is no
longer following any rules.
      That the enlightened are free of concepts distinguishing “good” from
“evil” leads to the claim that they are “beyond good and evil” and thus
cannot be moral but must be nihilists.16 As Sengcan, the Third Patriarch of
Zen Buddhism, extolled his listeners, “Be not concerned with right and
wrong—the conflict between right and wrong is the sickness of the mind.”
The dichotomies of “right and wrong” and “good and evil” are only set up
by the conceptualizing mind and must be gotten past. Like the enlightened
prisoner returning to Plato’s cave, enlightened mystics do not deem the
values of our shadow world to be of ultimate significance. The enlightened
pass no judgments because there are no judgments to be made—all other-
related values are rendered utterly groundless. “Good” and “evil” are
merely products of the unenlightened mind, reflecting unenlightened
interests (especially those of the personal will). At best, morality is
consigned to the path to enlightenment—since thinking about the welfare of
others helps lessen a sense of one’s own self-centeredness—but it is
jettisoned along with all other unenlightened baggage upon enlightenment.
The enlightened are free of all such restrictions and are free to do whatever
they want. They are beyond all sanctions and all authorities, and no course
of action is binding. They are truly autonomous. Antinomian behavior, as
also occurs sometimes in messianic and millennial movements, is only to be
expected.17 Mystics self-indulgently focus simply on the task they are doing
without any goal and with a callous disregard of the consequences to others.
Thus, mystical ways of life can only be described as nonmoral, since they
can have no moral dimension. Even if the enlightened happen to choose to
follow a tradition’s precepts, their mystical experiences render morality a
concern only for the unenlightened—the enlightened have transcended it.
      However, this position does not follow from the enlightened’s freedom
from conceptual categories—such freedom need not lead to a denial of
morality. In their enlightened state, mystics are no longer consciously
applying values, but mystics may have internalized moral values if they had
practiced them on the path. They simply are no longer reacting to a label
that they themselves had previously utilized for a situation. There is no
longer a question of “ought” or “duty,” but moral mystics are now incapable
of committing a selfish act, and their selflessness is filled with a moral
concern, and so they can only act with other-regardingness. They no longer
ponder alternatives of what is “good” or “bad,” or review rules and then
decide how to act. (This will be qualified below.) They see what will help
(according to their beliefs and values). But even if they are not thinking
“This is good,” thereby allowing their responses to be spontaneous and
effortless, the enlightened are still operating implicitly with values. The
mystics’ dispositions have been transformed, and so rule-following to
adjust their behavior or to keep negative actions in check is no longer
needed. Moral mystics now are in a state of awareness from which they
spontaneously express their compassion.
      This means that enlightened moral mystics are “beyond good and evil”
only in the morally innocuous sense that they are beyond all rule-following,
as any expert in virtues would be. Consciously following a rule would mean
that one is not yet enlightened—it would indicate that one is basing
decisions on dichotomizing the situation by the analytical mind into unreal
entities, and so one is not acting perfectly. But in the enlightened state, one
has fully internalized values—typically the ethical values of their tradition.
The values now become literally a second nature. So too, the enlightened’s
actions need not be aimless: they can have an implicit intentionality based
on their beliefs. What has changed is what moral mystics are: they now are
moral to their core; they do not simply decide to do some moral acts. It is a
way of being, and in that state moral mystics are exempt from observing
ethical precepts, but their actions will be informed by other-regardingness.
In Augustine’s phrase, moral enlightened mystics can “love God, and do
what you will”—all resulting acts will always be moral. They have reached
the spirit behind the letter of the rules and no longer need the letter. The
enlightened will be moral but not “moralistic” in the sense of clumsily
trying to follow the letter but not the spirit of a precept, nor “legalistic” in
the sense of putting rule-following or duties above other-regardingness. An
image applied to both the Christian Francis of Assisi and the Japanese
Buddhist Basho contrasts the ease and steadiness with which they walked in
the exact footsteps of the founders of their respective religions—precisely
because of their lack of effort to do so—with the faulty and clumsy efforts
of the learned who try to put their feet in the footsteps but with thought and
hesitation.
     Thus, mystics are “unprincipled” in the sense of not needing to review
principles, but not in the morally objectionable sense. To put the point
paradoxically: they have “a morality beyond morality”—Zhuangzi’s “great
humaneness” beyond “humaneness.” That is, they are not choosing “good”
and rejecting “evil”; they abandon the categories altogether when goodness
has completely taken over. As with all concepts, the enlightened have
overcome the duality of distinct “real” entities that our value-concepts
create, and they now see what is really there. The conventional dichotomy
of “good” and “evil” has been surpassed, but from the ultimate point of
view “good” still applies (Matilal 1977: 26–27). Other-regardingness is still
the master value in the lives of moral mystics. Thus, they are in a state that
transcends the rules but does not transcend morality: enlightened moral
mystics are beyond ethics (in the sense of needing to consult a set of norms
before acting), but they are not beyond morality (in the sense of being
other-regarding).