Are New Theories of the Mind Needed?
Thus, meditation and mystical experiences are potential sources of new data
for neuroscientists. Brain-imaging technology is beginning to identify the
areas of the brain affected by meditation. But it is one thing to study the
brain during previously unexamined states of consciousness or mental
functioning; it is another to come up with a new theory of the mind or of
how the brain works. Efforts at theorizing are beginning regarding the
mechanisms and areas the brain involved in these experiences.
Nevertheless, these studies do lead to a broader question: do mystical
experiences force a revision in the current framework of neuroscience?
      It is not at all obvious that scientists must revise any accepted theory of
how the brain works in light of these studies of mystical states of
consciousness (see Harrington & Zajonc 2006). They may be able to
explain the workings quite conventionally. However, mystical experiences
may reveal aspects of consciousness or types of mental functioning that
cannot be explained by existing theories. Perhaps, as many classical mystics
claimed, there is a unique mental functioning in mystical experiences
distinct from reasoning and other experiences (e.g., the “intellect” of
medieval Christian mysticism or the “buddhi” in some Indian traditions).
Meditation may aid in understanding consciousness itself by clearing away
the noise in most conscious states, thereby leaving a “pure awareness,” free
of other activity (Forman 1998a). Some neurological evidence exists for
such a state of awareness free of sensory and conceptual content (see
Sullivan 1995; Peters 1998: 13–16). The depth-mystical experience may be
presenting consciousness in its simplest form. If consciousness can exist
free of input, it is harder to see consciousness as merely a product of
sensory or other bodily activity. A contentless consciousness would also
present problems for functionalism or any information-processing theories
of the mind. Meditation may also be enhancing and extending the faculty of
mental perception through the techniques for cultivating extraordinary
states of concentration (Wallace 2003: 23). It may show that we are capable
of controlling what were thought to be involuntary bodily processes or that
we can train our awareness or compassion.3
      And just as high-energy physics caused physicists to rethink aspects of
Newtonian theory, so too developing “high-energy states of consciousness”
may open neuroscientists to the need for new explanations (Wallace 2007:
167). Or maybe not: naturalists argue that no new theory is needed even for
depth-mystical experiences since they involve either a malfunctioning brain
(e.g., Saver & Rubin 1997) or a feedback effect occurring when all sensory
and other differentiated content is removed while one remains conscious.
This may explain all of the experience’s properties and thus explain away
its alleged cognitivity. Indeed, most naturalists need convincing that there is
a state of “pure consciousness” devoid of any intentional object. Most think
there can be no consciousness without an object being present:
consciousness is inherently intentional—when there is no object, there is no
consciousness. Nor is it clear that studying the neural correlates active in a
state of pure consciousness brings us closer to understanding consciousness
itself or how it arises, although it may bring its correlates into clearer focus.
      Currently the metaphysical framework for most neuroscientists is
materialist: consciousness is simply an activity of matter or at most its
product. Somehow consciousness emerges from the brain, and thus the
focus in studying any experiences can be exclusively on the material bases
producing our consciousness. Some neuroscientists recognize that
materialism is a philosophical assumption and accept it only tentatively, but
many think it is an empirical finding of science itself and do not qualify
their claims—they immediately go from establishing neural correlates to a
reduction of mental events without an argument (see Hick 2006: 92–103).
However, others reject materialism, and a nonmaterial mind acting on the
brain and having its own causal powers may become accepted as an
intrinsic part of the universe, even if the mind remains dependent on
material bases for its appearance. If so, neuroscience will have to change.
But just because meditation may, for example, lower stress levels in the
body, does not mean that the mind is necessarily not a product of matter. So
too, “pure consciousness” events may be explainable in a materialistic
framework, even if this requires dismissing these experiences as
malfunctions. Mystical experiences in themselves do not require that the
mind be somehow unattached to the brain—even if mystical experiences
are cognitive, the mind may still simply be the product of (or identical to)
the brain.
      However, scientists arguably cannot develop an adequate
understanding of consciousness using only the “instrumental/analytical”
functions of the mind and any nonanalytical functions currently recognized
by scientists. Unless mystical experiences can be shown to be the result of
mental malfunctioning, scientists cannot ignore mystical experiences but
also must account for the “receptive/contemplative” modes of both mystical
tracks. If so, then it would only be the experiences themselves as new data
on states of consciousness that scientists would have to accept, not the
alleged mystical insights into the nature of reality. Neuroscientists are
attempting to study mystical states of consciousness as mental phenomena,
not any mystical knowledge-claims. It would be comparable to studying the
nature of sense-experience by scanning practicing physicists—any of the
physicists’ theories based on those experiences would be irrelevant. But if
scientists revise their theories in light of mystical knowledge-claims about
consciousness or perception, this would be an instance of mysticism
contributing to science (see Goleman & Thurman 1991; Austin 1998;
Wallace’s response to Smith-Churchland’s materialism in Houshmand,
Livingston, & Wallace 1999: 33–36).
      But neuroscientists to date are using standard Western scientific
techniques to study meditators, not devising a new and different science.
Only facts discerned by the analytical mind and current scientific methods
are accepted into the body of knowledge. Scientists today try to explain the
mind materialistically in terms of material forces acting on the brain’s
constituent parts. There is some first-person self-reporting (e.g., Smith &
Tart 1998), but any first-person approach emphasizing a subject’s actual
awareness has not been fully incorporated into science. First-person
“subjective” experience is not quantifiable or measurable in any exact way
but is something different in character. There is no objective way to assess
the person’s phenomenological claims: first-person claims relate merely
how the experience seems to the subject, and this sense may be misleading.
Instead, only the third-person approach of what is objectively measurable,
with its results being testable by others, is seen as leading to scientific
knowledge in consciousness studies. Indeed, checking and testing by others
is essential to any science. Thus, the focus remains on the processes
accompanying subjective experiences that can be measured in the same way
as any other process in physics and chemistry. Even when a neuroscientist
who had mystical experiences—Mario Beauregard—speaks of a “new
scientific frame of reference” that goes beyond materialism, he still ends up
speaking only of the scientific investigation of the neural, physiological,
psychological, and social conditions favoring the occurrence of mystical
experiences (2007: 294–95), not a new type of science.
      A second-person approach through trained interviewers asking
questions about one’s experiences is especially popular in the study of drug
effects. Because such questioning is after the experiences themselves and
relies on testimony, it is only indirectly empirical and thus only “quasi-
experimental” (Hood 2001: i). In the psychology of religion, Ralph Hood
devised a questionnaire (1975) based on Walter Stace’s phenomenology of
mystical experiences (1960a). He revised his “M Scale” later to
differentiate extrovertive and introvertive experiences and postexperience
religious interpretations (Hood, Morris, & Watson 1993). One issue is how
questions are framed. Usually questions reflect a theistic bias. For example,
a recent Gallup poll on religious experiences omitted anything related to
mysticism but only had questions about a numinous experience of a “divine
actor”—i.e., an active theistic god, not an inactive mystical ground.
Classical introvertive mystics do not speak of a transcendent reality set off
apart from the experiencer. Answers also are limited by how the questions
are framed and by the participants’ culture’s framework: subjects may
answer “God” because they have no other concepts for a transcendent
reality even if the experience did not seem personal in nature. Nor is it
always clear what degree of theological ramification participants intend.
They also may simply assume that whatever experience they have must be
the same as others have had when they speak of “experiencing God.”
Participants may not mean the same thing that the questioners mean by such
terms as “mystical,” “oneness,” and so forth. (One is reminded of
Wittgenstein’s problem of public versus private meaning and the example
of a beetle hidden in a box: the word “beetle” has a public meaning, and
each person knows what a beetle is by looking at his or her own beetle, but
this does not mean that what is in the box is what each expects.) For
example, an experiencer may label a premonition as being momentarily
“one with God.” A vague sensed presence becomes seen by Christians as
Jesus or Mary. Any weakened sense of self becomes an experience of
“mystical oneness” or “mystical union.” One may feel “in the presence of
God” anytime one is in church or just feeling happy. Any positive state of
consciousness may be deemed “mystical.” So too, one person’s experiences
of “cosmic consciousness” and LSD experiences may be described with the
same words, even though they seem qualitatively different to the
experiencer (Smith & Tart 1998: 106).
      Thus, little of the experienced content may be revealed even by low-
ramified terms. In general, words about transcendent reality are emotionally
loaded, and their meaning may differ from one subject to another and from
the questioner’s meaning. If there is something truly ineffable about
mystical experiences, such problems are only aggravated. In sum, because
experiencers usually learn the vocabulary for “mystical experiences” prior
to those experiences (and Wittgensteinians would add, outside those
experiences in public events), we cannot tell exactly what experience they
had when they label something “an experience of God” or whether they
have had the same experience as others. More questions, more detail in the
questions in surveys, and in-depth interviews can limit this problem but not
eliminate it entirely.
      Current neuroscience reflects the standard scientific third-person
approach: it is a matter of studying the neural “hardware” of the brain
through PET scans and so on. However, some argue that neuroscience also
needs supplementary “soft sciences” to deal with the “software” of the mind
(Goleman & Thurman 1991: 57–58). Currently scientists specify and test
theories in the ordinary dualistic state of consciousness, the mind’s default
mode. Charles Tart and Roger Walsh see this as problematic for the
scientific study of any altered states of consciousness.4 They think that the
nature of mystical experiences cannot be judged by the unenlightened in
ordinary consciousness, and they propose that “state-specific sciences” be
developed to understand the phenomena of the altered states that
complement standard neuroscience. Since all sciences depend on methods
appropriate to their subject and on replication by properly trained observers,
scientists would need to be trained to be participant-observers of altered
states of consciousness to report on the experiences (Walsh 1992; see also
Pekala & Cardeña 2000; Wallace 1989, 2007).5 Fritz Staal was an earlier
advocate of the need for first-person experiences to study mysticism:
mysticism cannot be studied seriously only indirectly from the outside but
also directly from within—otherwise, “it would be like a blind man
studying vision” (1975: 124): “No one would willingly impose upon
himself such artificial restraints when exploring other phenomena affecting
or pertaining to the mind; he would not study perception only by analyzing
reports of those who describe what they perceive, or by looking at what
happens to people and their bodies when they are engaged in perceiving.
What one would do when studying perception, in addition, if not first of all,
is to observe and analyze one’s own perceptions” (ibid.: 123–24). One can
study the history of art, the physics of paintings, and the physiology and
neurology of perception, but this collectively would not indicate what it is
like to be an artist or the “subjective” experience of anyone observing a
painting. So too, a science of mysticism would require more. This would
separate the study of mystical experiences from the objective approach of
physics that is the current paradigm for neuroscience. A new science would
not be based in the ordinary state of consciousness but would have state-
specific knowledge. But problems of how to replicate another’s experience
and to test any theories in an altered state persist.
      Such a “contemplative science” would not be a replacement for
neuroscience as currently practiced in the ordinary state of consciousness
by studying biological correlates of mystical experiences. Rather, first-
person approaches would fulfill aims that the methods of the current natural
sciences were never designed to achieve (Wallace 2003: 260; see also
Ricard 2003). Thus, it would be part of a new expanded science of
consciousness embracing both neuroscience and personal “subjective”
experience—a collaboration of first-person and third-person approaches
(see Shear & Jevning 1999; Cabezón 2003: 52–55; Lancaster 2004; Dalai
Lama 2005: 133–37). In fact, the basic idea of a research strategy linking
the phenomenological approach with a neurological approach is already in
place (Flanagan 2011: 82); the study of mystical experiences did not
introduce the idea. But some advocates go beyond the supplemental
approach and advocate a synthesis of the two into one new hybrid science
that would change the character of current neuroscience, letting the first-
person approach “reshape” the third (e.g., Thompson 2006: 233).
      In any case, little has been done as yet on this front with regard to
mystical states of consciousness. A contemplative science would also be
subject to all of the problems of first-person reports for any science. Such
reports are notoriously unreliable: since we are not aware of all that goes on
in the mind or what influences observations, there is always the problem of
self-deception. How is science to accept any introspective account given
after a mystical experience as incorrigible evidence of a state of
consciousness, let alone any ontic claim? Indeed, whether the “pure
consciousness” of a depth-mystical experience is amenable even to any
first-person introspection is an issue: “awareness itself” cannot become a
phenomenal object—it is inherently subjective. When we “observe
consciousness” in ordinary self-consciousness, we are only aware that we
are aware—if what is observed becomes an object, then by definition it is
not the subjectivity of consciousness or the content of the depth-mystical
experience. The depth-mystical state becomes an intentional object of
thought only after the experience is over.
     But if consciousness constitutes a level of reality that is not reducible
to material bases, then insights into certain aspects of what is real in the
universe could only be achieved in a first-person manner and not by a third-
person approach. If consciousness is accepted as causally real, this raises
another issue: the question is not only whether a new hybrid science
incorporating both first-person accounts of experiences and neuroscientific
accounts of mechanisms is needed, but also whether third-person
neuroscience as currently practiced is fundamentally misguided.