In addition to conflicting mystical claims, the alleged scientific reduction of
mystical experiences to purely natural events is the other major challenge to
mystical claims to valid knowledge. Do scientific explanations of mystical
experiences in fact defeat mystical claims to knowledge? In particular, are
introvertive mystical experiences explained away by natural explanations as
nothing more than internal brain events? Or, conversely, can science supply
support for mystical cognitive claims? In short, does the study of the
physical states of experiencers bear in principle on the truth of mystics’
alleged insights? Scientific research on meditators and experiencers is
growing, but the philosophical issue has not received as much scholarly
attention. Advocates and critics alike typically simply assume without
discussion that the studies obviously validate or invalidate religious beliefs,
depending on their prior convictions.
      To address the relevance of the scientific study of mystical
experiences, two assumptions must be made. First, we cannot seriously
doubt that there must be a biological basis enabling these experiences to
occur. Mystical experiences, like all our other experiences, are firmly
embodied. Theists may argue that introvertive theistic mystical experiences
involve a unique input from God alone. Nevertheless, there must be some
basis in the human anatomy that permits God to enter our mind. The Dalai
Lama suggests that there may be no neural correlates for “pure
consciousness” (Gyatso & Goleman 2003: 42). But even if this
consciousness exists independently of the brain, there still must be some
basis in human beings permitting its appearance in us. Thus, even if mystics
realize a transcendent reality, they still need some basis in the brain for this
to occur, and so mystical states of consciousness must somehow be
mediated by the neurological processes in the body. That is, these
experiences are not disembodied transcendent events, but are human
experiences that must somehow be grounded in the human body. In
particular, all experiences apparently have neural substrates and a
biochemical basis in our brain. Mystical experiences do not differ from any
other experience in this regard. As professor of behavioral medicine
Richard Sloan says: “there is nothing at all remarkable about reporting that
ecstatic religious experiences are associated with a neurological substrate,”
since “all human conscious activity, religious or otherwise, has an
underlying counterpart in the brain” (2006: 247–49). Nor is there any
reason to doubt that scientists can study the brain during these experiences
like any others, or that they may be able to identify neural and other
biological bases. Thus, pointing out neurological bases in no way begs the
question against mystical cognitivity: even if these experiences produce an
insight, they need a biological basis to appear.
      The second assumption is that whether mystical experiences are
delusory or involve a genuine insight into the nature of reality, today it is
increasingly becoming accepted that they are connected to genuine
observable neurological events that are distinct from other types of mental
events and are not merely products of imagination (Newberg, d’Aquili, &
Rause 2002: 7, 143). Much mental activity involves different parts of the
brain, and mystical experiences may too, but there is objective evidence of
distinctive configurations of brain events uniquely connected to mystical
experiences.
      These assumptions also apply to meditation: because of the interaction
or identity of the mind and the body, any calming of the mind during
meditation will probably have effects on the body—at a minimum, calming
and stabilizing some biological functions. Such effects may be measurable
in different ways. Nor is there any reason to doubt that neuroscientists may
eventually identify the exact parts of the brain that are active or inactive in
such experiences, as indicated by blood flow in functional MRI imaging or
the activity of chemicals by PET and SPECT scans. Indeed, that meditation
physically affects brain structures is becoming well established (e.g.,
Davidson et al. 2003; Lazar et al. 2005; Hölzel et al. 2011b; Leung et al.
2013; Kang et al. 2013).
      The picture of neuroscience in this area at present is of an active field
with numerous competing explanations of different types of mystical
experiences, both in terms of the brain mechanisms involved and in the
alleged loci in the brain associated with the experiences. The data are not
always consistent, but there is no reason to doubt that eventually scientists
may end up with a consensus on these matters. Nevertheless, scientists
should be cautious in jumping quickly to a conclusion about the material
basis of mystical experiences. To begin with, there are two different classes
of mystical experiences with different types of experiences within each, and
how the brain functions during the difference experiences may well differ
(see Hood 1997; Dunn, Hartigan, & Mikulas 1999). So too, scientists can
distinguish concentrative and mindfulness meditation (Valentine & Sweet
1999). If, for example, some drug can stimulate some part of the brain and
enable depth-mystical experiences to occur, this does not mean that that
drug can enable mindfulness or that the same areas of the brain are active in
mindfulness and the other types of experiences. And within the two basic
meditative tracks, there is also a plethora of techniques (see Andresen 2000;
Shear 2006); these may well involve different neurological states. In short,
scans of concentrative meditators such as Yogins may well differ from those
of mindfulness Zen Buddhist meditators, and different neurological
explanations may be needed for each case. So too, there may be different
neural states for those introvertive mystical experiences with differentiated
content and those without such content.
      First, two points should be addressed concerning the scientific study of
mysticism generally rather than the issue of its relation to the matter of
mystical knowledge-claims.