Mystical Selflessness and Morality
From what has been discussed, it appears that mysticism has less logical
relevance for morality, either positively or negatively, then is usually
supposed. Moral values and mystical values are not identical, and one set
does not entail the other: mystical values are reality-centered, not
necessarily other-regarding. We cannot argue that because someone is
indifferent or antinomian, he or she never had a mystical experience or is
not mystically enlightened. Thus, it is hard to argue that mystical
experiences have a necessary moral component. So too, mysticism is not
necessarily incompatible with moral values or their factual presuppositions.
In sum, the generalizations that “Mystics are necessarily moral” and
“Mysticism and morality are incompatible” are both wrong. Instead, we
have to investigate specific mystics and specific mystical ways of life to see
if the mystic or the tradition is moral or not.
      That mystical experiences do not have a necessary moral value also
limits any contribution mysticism may make to solving ethical dilemmas
today. There is no one set of virtues or precepts dictated by mystical
experiences to contribute to the discussion. Mysticism’s only contribution
to values is the experience of selflessness and impartiality—other values
remain independent of mystical experiences and come from other sources.
But mystical experiences do not merely reinforce one’s existing beliefs,
values, and ethical precepts: mystical experiences can push one toward
more impartiality, expand the applications of one’s values via one’s factual
beliefs to include all people or even to embrace all sentient animals, and
make other-regarding conduct more central in one’s life. Thus, if a mystic
chooses to be moral, the experiences can make him or her more morally
active toward others. He or she may also be an exemplar of the tradition’s
ideals for others to aspire to.
      The principal impact of mysticism on morality thus is that it enables
one to go beyond an ordinary moral concern to an expanded even-minded,
selfless concern. This can lead to universalizing moral concern. For the
enlightened, there is a radical shift in point of view away from all self-
centeredness. Self-will or its cognitive base (a sense of separateness and
self-sufficiency) comes to be seen as the cause of all dissonance with
reality. Realizing that there is no ego to enhance becomes the cognitive
ground out of which one operates. Emotional states connected to self-will
and self-love—pride, hatred, envy, anger, jealousy, and so on—become
targets. Each thought, word, and deed is seen as having an effect on the
inner life. Virtues that lessen a sense of self are valued—e.g., kindness,
honesty, patience, generosity, gentleness, forgiveness, tolerance, and
humility in the sense of seeing one’s true place in the scheme of selfless
things. Value-concepts and rules do not stand between the mystic and
reality. Rules that restrict actions that might harm others are valuable in
lessening a sense of one’s individual importance, but rule-following is only
the first step on the path for a practitioner and is transcended later.
      All personal desires must be ended, including any desire for a reward
for one’s actions toward others, or remorse over the results. Ironically, one’s
own spiritual well-being is promoted by forgetting oneself and (for those
mystics who adopt morality) giving oneself over fully to the welfare of
others. A new view is grounded in mystical realities, not in reasoning about
the logical conclusions of our beliefs and values. By becoming selfless,
moral mystics go beyond even complete impartiality (i.e., attaching no
more importance to oneself than to any others) to denying any value to
themselves. With no self-image to maintain, no personal desires, and no
fears, the result is a complete self-denying love of others. No self-centered
desires are imposed through one’s actions: compassionate action becomes
the expression of what one is.
      Thus, selflessness in the enlightened state paradoxically becomes what
one is. One is now free of striving to assert any self-will in one’s actions.
One’s virtues are now grounded in one’s knowledge of what one takes to be
the fundamental nature of reality. One’s actions are grounded in the
wellspring of all reality—the actions are now “noumenal” rather than the
selfish acts resulting from our ego when our perspective is cut off from the
ground of reality. Inwardly, mystics remain emotionally calm, unconcerned
with the effects of actions on themselves. Thus, one is rooted in the source
of the world or self, but also outwardly active in the world. All actions, no
matter how mundane, become meaningful, although they may remain
unspectacular to an observer. Mystical experiences contribute a sense of
reality, certainty, and selflessness to a new perspective shaped by the beliefs
and values from the tradition to which the mystic belongs. One becomes a
selfless person only through cultivating a complete mystical way of life, not
in isolated experiences. Nor will meditation alone inculcate the virtues and
beliefs necessary for morality. Meditation may help break down a sense of
self, but values and beliefs are not given there—meditation is not tied to
any particular way of life or set of belief-claims and values. It can begin to
give a sense of selflessness and to energize oneself in whatever actions one
chooses. It can also help calm the mind and focus attention. This helps
one’s efficiency and spontaneity outside of meditation. However, all aspects
of one’s life become important in a mystical way of life.
      Mystical detachment must be seen in light of this selflessness: it is not
lack of concern but lack of personal attachments and desires. It need not
lead to a passive withdrawal from the world. So too, selflessness leads to
being more receptive, but this does not mean that only inactivity can result.
Indeed, to renounce and hate the world can be seen as a form of reverse
attachment. All objects of desires are neutralized—one is no longer attached
to this or that—but their reality cannot be denied. The change is simply that
all personal desire has disappeared, not anything affecting what is really
there. Mystics now see everything from a third-person point of view: reality
is once again the center of everything, not oneself. One no longer sees one’s
life and actions as one’s own—there is simply selfless reality at work in the
world. With the sense of self abrogated, the source of reality now fills the
vacuum previously filled by the false sense of an ego. Mystics now act from
the point of view of reality (as defined by one’s tradition), not from a false
sense of their own independent reality. All acts become like volunteer work,
selflessly done for no reward and only to help others. Mystics’ actions are
now spontaneous, since they are free of deliberation and selfish motivation.
With the false sense of a separate, independently existing ego no longer
causing friction, one’s action conforms easily to the ethical law of the
universe (as defined by one’s tradition). A mystic can “live without asking
why” within his or her way of life.
      When combined with a moral commitment, the resulting selflessness
is, in the words of Evelyn Underhill, not a selfish, other-worldly calm but
renewed vitality: the flowers of the contemplative life are practical energies
that help mystics to enter social life more completely (1961b: ix). Theistic
mystics will see love as the power of the universe. One’s life then becomes
an expression of the power tapped into by mystical experiences. To such
mystics, human beings realize our fullest state by being constantly engaged
in self-emptying acts that are grounded in an awareness of our source, not
in seeking our own happiness alone. Engaging both the “vertical”
dimension of being and the “horizontal” dimension of becoming, one
remains inwardly calm, grounded in the source of the world, while still
remaining outwardly active—through detachment, one acts while
“reposing” unmoved and still in the source. Thus, the impact is not only on
one’s inner life in general but on the inner dimension of one’s actions.
One’s consciousness is no longer cut off from the source, yet one remains
active in the world of diversity. All actions, however mundane, become
meaningful. Now rooted in the transcendent, one “lives constantly in the
presence of the divine” while acting. Mystics become the human action of
the transcendent in the realm of change, treating all that they encounter with
other-regarding concern. The resulting actions may seem unspectacular to
an observer—they may seem to entail no more than simply no longer being
selfish and instead acting according to the values of one’s tradition. But the
actions reflect the self-giving source of being and conform to the ethical
laws of the universe (as defined by a tradition). In Jalal al-Din Rumi’s
words, adapted from an Islamic political title, one will be “the shadow of
God on earth.”
      Thus, the moral mystic is no longer imposing self-centered desires
through actions. All actions become works for other (equally selfless)
beings, rather than attempts to twist reality to meet the needs of an illusory,
independently existing individual ego. The need to act compassionately no
longer requires explaining, but is a natural product of one’s state in the
world. All of one’s actions will be moral in that none will have the intent of
harming another for one’s own benefit, and one will be actively helping
others even if one’s factual beliefs about what is real turn out to be wrong.
Compassion becomes a self-denying love for all. Indeed, by denying
oneself, the resulting actions will go beyond even complete impartiality to
discounting oneself totally. One helps others by treating all people equally
according to their needs as defined by one’s tradition. One has no loved
ones or enemies.
      For all enlightened mystics, actions mirror those of the overflowing
transcendent source. To use a common image (e.g., Brahma-sutra-bhashya
2.3.42; Matthew 5:45–46; see Daodejing 5, 23), the source of this world is
like sunlight or rain in that it uniformly gives to all, the just and the unjust,
without discrimination, and thus the mystic’s actions mirror this, giving to
each person what that person needs without judgment. The source can be
seen as either a benign or a loving power continuously giving itself over to
produce and sustain the natural realm despite the problems of natural
suffering. Nothing in the comparative study of mysticism suggests that the
underlying source would be more concerned with one part of reality than
another—the simple joy of existence is more central to the experiences.
And the enlightened mystics’ actions mirror the source.
                                Epilogue
                    The Demise of Mysticism Today