Mystical Decision-Making
Daoist non-self-assertion action (wuwei) has been described as a type of
practical engaged knowledge—a skill-knowledge (Slingerland 2004)—and
the same can be said of all enlightened action. It is a kind of learned skill
involving know-how. The spontaneity of enlightened actions and being
“beyond good and evil” presents a further issue: does not morality require
reflecting on alternative courses of action and making decisions on how to
act? How can mystics be moral if they do not apply principles but simply
respond in the present without motive or without reflecting on norms? Even
with internalized values, how can freedom from concepts, rules, calculation,
and all decisions be compatible with a moral life? In particular, the issue
arises for those who cannot but act morally. Following Laozi, the
dichotomy of “good and evil” comes into play only after goodness has
declined; when all was good, we had no concept for “good”—only when a
contrast appeared did this concept arise; thus, when all is good, there is (as
Kant also noted) no concept of “good” (Daodejing 2). The enlightened’s
“inner clarity” (ming) or the “light of heaven/nature” (tian) now guides their
actions (Zhuangzi 2). They no longer look for the “good” thing to do.
Dwelling beyond all categories including “morality,” freed from the mental
constraints of evaluation and rule-following, the enlightened engage in an
outpouring of beneficial action (Daodejing 19). The natural expression of
their character is the caring and supportiveness of the Way.
      But since all the actions of enlightened moral mystics are
automatically moral, can the concept of “moral” even apply? Freedom to do
otherwise is usually taken to be a presupposition of morality, and the
enlightened apparently have given that up. So too, the enlightened no longer
have a conscious motive to help others. That is, if moral enlightened
mystics cannot choose but to act morally, do they really earn the epithet
“moral” since they have no temptation to perform otherwise? The actions
may be beneficial to others, but the enlightened would lack the necessary
motivation to be moral, and we could not morally commend persons who
have no choice in their actions, even if those actions are always beneficial.
      Nevertheless, it appears that the enlightened may still face choices at
least on some occasions. The enlightened mystic’s decision-making appears
to reflect that of any expert. For most of our activities, we do not consult
lists of what we should do. Acting without thinking is the norm. We do not
normally think about the process of walking when walking—we just walk.
We speak without reviewing vocabulary lists or rules of grammar, and
usually only notice them when we make a mistake. Experts at chess do not
calculate their next move—they see what to do. The same holds in the
moral life. People seldom make moral judgments—if asked, we can reflect
on why we did something, but normally we simply act. Hubert and Stuart
Dreyfus (1992), in reviewing the “phenomenology of skillful coping,”
noted that principles figure only in the early stage of ethical development.
Higher stages involve spontaneous intuitions, and the highest form of
ethical comportment consists of being able to stay involved, to gain more
information, and to refine one’s intuitions without reflection. Experts do not
reason or solve problems. Their expertise is also not easily communicated
—masters respond to philosophical questions with banalities. They do not
act with deliberation but see intuitively and act spontaneously and naturally
(also see Deutsch 1992 on “creative morality”).
      It seems reasonable to conclude that enlightened mystics, having
internalized beliefs and values, also have a predisposition on how to
respond in most situations and thus can do so without thinking and with
immediacy and effortlessness. What precisely a moral mystic may do may
not be predictable in advance, even if we know his or her tradition’s beliefs
and values, but, with self-interest destroyed, love or compassion will
automatically lead only to acts that help. “What should I do?” is no longer
asked, but the enlightened will see what to do. As the Dreyfuses said of
moral experts, caring does not entail any one particular way of acting—one
does spontaneously whatever the situation requires (1992: 128).
      It is important to note that the enlightened live in a state structured by
their beliefs and values. Mystical freedom is not anarchy. The enlightened
live completely in the present but are not stuck in a free-floating chaos—
their beliefs and values still guide them. Their actions are not blind but are
intentional—Ding the Daoist cook did not flail away aimlessly with a
carving knife, but had an objective to accomplish, and he accomplished it,
effortlessly cutting the ox at its joints (Zhuangzi 3). Mystics now act with a
cultivated intuitive response to whatever situation is at hand as their beliefs
and values dictate, even if they do not think in terms of “good” and “evil.”
They are emotionally even-minded but not blind to their actions’ outcome.
They do not treat all human beings alike but treat each person individually,
as with the Buddha adjusting his teaching to the capacity of his listeners. In
sum, even if the mystics do not deliberate, they still act deliberately.
      However, even though mystics can see intuitively how to act in most
situations, they may well encounter novel situations where their intuitions
will not guide them, and they then will have to deliberate. When faced with
a novel situation, moral experts have to resort to abstract principles
(Dreyfus & Dreyfus 1992: 122). For moral mystics, the underlying other-
regarding ethos will not be in question, but they too must have recourse to
their tradition’s ethics in determining what to do. But a tradition’s ethics
may not be enough as new problems arise. Rules do not necessarily dictate
a precise move in every situation. Knowing the rules of chess does not
explain a master’s move. The enlightened will do something to help that is
selfless, but what precisely they will do in hard cases may not be
predictable.
      Conversely, dilemmas for the enlightened may not be dilemmas to the
unenlightened. Consider the situation of a wild animal about to attack a
baby. Would mystics always intervene and kill the animal, or may some let
the animal continue its hunt for food? Either intervening or letting nature
takes its course leads to a death. It is easy for the unenlightened, with our
beliefs and values—we of course favor human beings, and we would
consider it to be morally callous not to try to save the baby. Arjuna too,
following the warrior’s dharma, would intervene to save a human life. Most
mystics may think human beings are more advanced on the path to
enlightenment and thus more worthy of help. However, not all mystics may
show such anthropocentric partiality and instead may simply watch as
events take their natural course, or they may assume that the baby earned
this fate by his or her actions in a previous life and let the karma of both
beings take its course. But whatever a mystic does, the point is that simply
removing him- or herself from the picture by being selfless is not enough:
some implicit value (here, favoring nature or human beings) becomes
operative, and the mystic must decide what to do. Thus, merely saying
“Give up self-will, and the right answer will automatically emerge” is
wrong—some implicit beliefs and values are always involved.
      Moreover, because they must choose, mystics are liable to make
mistakes. Unless they become literally omniscient and can foresee all
consequences of an act, they will be restricted by human limitations on their
ability to predict. Their perspectives on foreseeable consequences may be
very shortsighted. Unlike prophets, classical moral and nonmoral mystics
tend to emphasize person-to-person actions rather than social action (see
Jones 2004: 347–77),23 and those would be the only consequences that
matter to them.24 To Krishnamurti, social reform only scratches the surface;
what is needed is an inner change of the person (Lutens 1983: 42). And
from their limited perspective, mystics may well not hit on the best course
of action. Whatever actions moral mystics take will be “good” in that the
acts will not be selfish—in that sense, it does not matter what they do
because at least some other-regarding action will follow. But their actions
will not necessarily be the most helpful actions possible, and may have
negative consequences since their internalized framework of beliefs and
values may not in fact reflect reality. But for the nonomniscient moral
mystics, there may still be moral crises, even when they have given up their
will to God or the Way, and this means that decisions still may need to be
made, and so the mystic’s mind is involved. An act of will is in some sense
still necessary, and a choice remains.
      Thus, enlightened mystical decision-making may not be all that
different from that of nonmystics—the absence of a sense of self (and hence
the absence of the selfish option) is what makes it seem strange. If mystical
enlightenment is a type of skill, the enlightened, like other ethical experts,
normally will not reflect on how to act but instead will act spontaneously.
Only in situations that are ethically novel compared to those they have
previously encountered will they have to reflect. But in dualistic states, they
have the ability to deliberate; thus, if morality must be a matter of choices
and reflection, enlightened mystics too can be moral. Those who are moral
are “beyond good and evil,” but they are not antinomian but rather
“hypernomian”—i.e., they are not violating laws but are beyond needing to
consult them—as Eliot Wolfson depicts Kabbalistic mysticism (2006).