Nonconstructivism
Nonconstructivists in mystical studies deny that constructivism can be
extended to the depth-mystical experience (see Almond 1982; Forman
1990, 1998b, 1999). They are usually mislabeled “perennialists” after
“perennial philosophy.” But nonconstructivists need not embrace such a
philosophy: they may accept Christianity, Islam, or some other concrete
religious tradition as alone the best, or be naturalists who reject any
transcendent realism. It is affirming that there is an unstructured type of
mystical experience that defines nonconstructivism, not any particular
interpretation of that experience or any one philosophical or religious set of
beliefs or way of life. Conversely, perennial philosophers need not accept
the nonconstructivist interpretation of mystical experiences. Even calling
nonconstructivism “perennial psychology” (Robert Forman’s preferred
term) may be misleading. So too, the label “essentialists” is not applicable:
there is no one identical core to all types of mystical experiences, nor any
core set of essential beliefs about what is experienced that all
nonconstructivists must hold.18
      Nonconstructivists deny even moderate constructivism with regard to
the depth-mystical experience and contend that it is different from all other
cognitive states: a state of consciousness free of all content can be inferred
from the low-ramified, more phenomenological descriptions of the depth-
experience, and the more highly ramified accounts can be seen as post facto
interpretations. In general, nonconstructivists also tend to agree with
mystics that the depth-mystical experience is cognitive. But as noted in
chapter 1, the experience is not truly contentless. Obviously, mystics retain
something of the sense of the experience after it is over, even if the sense
can be expressed only in abstract terms—a sense of the direct awareness of
beingness, consciousness, oneness, fundamentality, power, and
immutability. But the experience is allegedly free of any objects or any
differentiable content to structure or anything that could structure the
experience and thus is empty of any content that a particular culture could
supply or shape.
      In addition, it is hard to claim that any two experiences with
differentiated content are exactly the same, but if a truly “pure
consciousness” event devoid of all diverse content does occur, then
logically all such experiences must be phenomenally identical.19 That is, if
there is an experience that is indeed truly empty of all differentiable content
that could shape it, it must be, as a matter of simple logic,
phenomenologically identical for all experiencers regardless of culture and
era (assuming all human beings have basically the same type of mind in this
regard). Thus, if mystics are correct, any depth-mystical experience must
always be the same for all experiencers, regardless of one’s culture or
beliefs, since there is no differentiable content during the experience itself
that would distinguish one experience from another for different people. It
is a truly culture-free and history-free experience. If so, there is one
universal, unmediated experience unconditioned by linguistic or other
structuring. (If there is such a common experience, this may say something
about the nature of our mind, but it does not necessarily mean that the
experience is veridical or in touch with a transcendent reality, as discussed
in the next two chapters.)
      Nonconstructivists may also argue (contra Kant) that the depth-
mystical experience is an unmediated, direct experience of the noumenon
that is experienced: any postexperience intentional object is the product of
memory and a conceptual scheme, but the experience itself is a direct
awareness of a noumenon. It is an experience of whatever it is that is
experienced unmediated by any learned cultural concepts. There also is no
reason to believe that any unlearned Kantian a priori categories could apply
since there is no differentiated content involved. If the depth-mystical
experience is in fact an experience of a reality, then this unmediated
“noumenal experience” is knowledge by participation free of all learned
concepts. The distinction between experience and conceptualizations
returns only once dualistic consciousness returns after the experience, and
the noumenon then becomes a phenomenon open to understanding and
interpretation. (Whether pure mindfulness involves seeing the sensory
world-in-itself is also an issue.)
     Nonconstructivists can readily agree that the images and
interpretations of the depth-mystical experience that mystics form in their
postexperience dualistic consciousness are shaped by the beliefs of each
particular mystic’s tradition that were learned as part of the training on the
mystical path. That is, after the depth-experience the analytical mind returns
and takes over with the cultural conceptions embedded in it. And what is
taken to be mystical knowledge will no doubt be shaped by the tradition: the
postexperience insight will be a combination of the experience and
doctrines. Nonconstructivists may agree that what part is contributed by the
experience and what part is contributed by the doctrine cannot be clearly
separated in the postexperience mystical insight. But that conceptualizations
influence knowledge does not mean that they must be present during the
depth-mystical experience itself. Nonconstructivists can rightly ask, if this
experience is in fact free of all differentiations—as the writings of even
many theistic mystics clearly suggest—what is present to structure it? If
meditation is a process of emptying the mind of conceptual content, as the
mystical traditions claim, what would remain present in the end to structure
any experience?