Consciousness
Whatever else the depth-mystical experience may involve, there is a “pure
consciousness,” i.e., an awareness empty of all differentiable content and
functions. This would lead classical mystics to deny the naturalists’ view of
consciousness as evolved from matter (see Flanagan 2011: 84–90; Jones
2013: 98–105). This also presupposes that all consciousness is one:
regardless of the “state” of consciousness or its content, awareness is
always the same light. To many mystics, the consciousness in one person is
the same in all persons—there is only one consciousness. To reductive
naturalists, consciousness is not a fundamental category of reality—in fact
some, such as Daniel Dennett, deny an inner subjective awareness really
exists. To other naturalists, the mind is a systems-property with the ability
to control parts of the body (including “involuntary” functions such as the
immune system through meditation) as part of one causal order. Thus,
naturalists can accept that experiences are real (i.e., not reducible to
material processes alone) and even causally efficacious. William James
believed our normal waking consciousness is but one special type of
consciousness that is separated by the filmiest of screens from other
potential forms of consciousness, and no account of the universe in its
totality can be final that disregards these forms (1958: 298). Henri Bergson,
C. D. Broad, and Aldous Huxley thought the brain does not produce
consciousness but is a “reducing valve” that permits in only the data
necessary for survival—our mind evolved on a need-to-know basis, but a
“mind at large” exists independent of our bodies. That is, the brain is a
receiver of consciousness, not its generator (also see Strassman 2001), but it
also prevents the mind at large from flooding our consciousness and making
it impossible to operate in the world. Some mystics and perennial
philosophers speak of a hierarchy of levels of consciousness—e.g., the
function that enables experiences of God (e.g., the Plotinian nous) being
higher than ordinary dualistic consciousness. To perennial philosophers,
consciousness is more fundamental than matter: matter emanates out of
consciousness, not vice versa.
      The Buddha, David Hume, and Immanuel Kant agree that no “I” is
found in the world we experience: the “I” is not an object of any experience
but is pure subjectivity. The analytical mind may try to make subjective
awareness into an object by making an image of blankness or by thinking
“The mind is still and empty.” But we cannot be aware of subjectivity:
when we observe consciousness, we are aware of nothing but whatever
object we are aware of (Searle 1992: 96–97). In the phenomenology of
“self-awareness,” we are never aware of the subject as an object—we are
only aware that we are aware. As the Upanishads and Ludwig Wittgenstein
said, the “I” is never an object of awareness, just as the eye is never within
the eye’s field of vision.21 However, in classical depth-mysticism, the
nature of consciousness is open to radically different interpretations. To
classical Indian mystics, consciousness exists eternally and is not the
activity of the brain or in any way dependent on the brain. Consciousness is
not a “subjective” product of each individual but a fundamental “objective”
reality. To the Dalai Lama, “pure luminous consciousness” is a subtle,
primordial, and fundamental consciousness that exists prior to its
appearance in human beings through evolution (Gyatso & Goleman 2003:
42). (Theravada Buddhism treats consciousness as a matter of unconnected
temporary and contingent events.) Such consciousness exists even when
there is no intentional content to be aware of. To Advaitins, this
consciousness is eternal and constitutes all existence: all “subjective” and
“objective” phenomena—both the individual subjective observer and what
is observed—are only appearance; the inactive, nonpersonal consciousness
is all that is real. It is partless and has no other features. It is more
“objective” than the “subjective” awareness of an individual, since it is the
same awareness of all persons and also constitutes the reality of all
“external” phenomena, but it can never be an object of awareness—it is
only known by participation.
      Theists may take the depth-experience to be of a created individual’s
consciousness or of the uncreated “spark of the soul” identical to God’s
being. A basic mind/body dualism is exemplified by Samkhya metaphysics:
there is no one common consciousness, but rather multiple conscious but
inactive persons (purushas), each totally distinct and independent of eternal
unconscious matter (prakriti). The individual consciousness that constitutes
each person is only an unchanging, eternally observing awareness—most
activities that we consider “mental” (e.g., reasoning and sense-experience)
are actually different modes of unconscious matter. To Advaita,
consciousness is the only reality and is eternal with no need for a creator
god. Nor is it a “field” within the illusory natural universe—it is not a part
of the “objective” material universe in any way. Nor does it reside in some
super-space, since that would still make it an object. Nor does Advaita
justify solipsism, since no individual truly exists.22 But, as discussed, one
cannot claim that consciousness constitutes “objective” phenomena based
on the depth-mystical experience alone when that experience is equally
open to simply being the ground of the self or simply an individual’s
ordinary awareness void of content.23
      Indeed, if anything, the depth-mystical experience shows
consciousness to be featureless: consciousness is simply what observes and
cannot be observed. Mystics consider it real, but its exact ontological status
is not given in any mystical experience. The depth-mystical experience
alone does not constitute grounds for a panpsychism in which every object
has at least some rudimentary consciousness, although it can easily be fitted
into such theories. But for Advaita, a stone in the “dream” is constituted by
consciousness, but it is not aware.24 Samkhya metaphysics contrasts with
any panpsychism. So too, a “pure consciousness” does not prove that
consciousness must exist independently of the body or matter: it may seem
eternal when experienced, but it could still be merely a naturally evolved
state of the brain free of all differentiated content. Even treating
consciousness as a “field,” modeled on magnetic fields, requires a physical
base—a brain or matter more generally.
      That the status of consciousness is open to wide interpretation can be
seen by considering René Descartes’s “I am conscious, therefore I am.” The
same experience that Descartes took as solid proof of the one irrefutable
fact—that an individual exists—is taken by Shankara as the experience of
the unchanging transcendent consciousness (Brahman) proving that no
individuals exist (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 1.1.1–2). All we can safely infer
from reflective awareness alone is that something conscious exists—what
we take its nature to be will depend on more considerations.
                                  The Self
When we consider the nature of a person, the first thing to note is that all
classical mystical traditions are opposed to any purely natural evolution. In
all traditional views, conscious beings are squarely part of the fabric of the
cosmos, not a chance result of material forces.25 We developed from
something greater, and currently we are alienated from our true self and
from our true state. Aurobindo saw two movements of evolution: one
material, for the emergence of the body, but also an “involution’ of the
divine in nature upward leading to a return to our divine state. So too, the
Dalai Lama accepts that the body evolved, but natural selection acting on
the random mutation of genes to increase the genes’ chances of survival or
any other material explanation is not the cause of consciousness (2005: 97).
Under traditional Buddhism, human beings devolved from celestial beings
through the process of karma and rebirth (ibid.: 107–8)—it was truly “the
descent of man”—and not evolved upward from less complex life-forms.
Karma plays a central role in the origin of human sentience (ibid.: 115). In
introvertive mystical traditions, there is something in us that is uncreated—
e.g., a “soul” or the “person” (purusha) of Samkhya—and our final state is
not of this world. Mystical experiences are not necessarily the source of
these ideas, but they are generally accepted. Nor do all traditions treat the
body as evil, as in Plotinus’s Neoplatonism or Buddhism—both Christianity
and Daoism are more affirmative. Plotinus wanted to be released from time,
but Eckhart said he would accept eternal life in this realm.
      In classical mysticism, the inner stillness of a mystical experience
reveals our true nature. The sense of a separate phenomenal “self” or “ego”
that we normally identify with is then seen as simply something that our
analytical mind has patched together from the ideas and feelings arising in
our stream of experiences—i.e., the “self” is an artificial creation having no
reality. In mystical experiences, there is a loss of this sense of a separate
entity within the phenomenal world that is somehow attached to a body.
(Naturalists can easily account for the loss of a sense of a self if they,
following Daniel Dennett and many neuroscientists, deny that there is any
one command center to our consciousness.) But does this mean that this is
empirical evidence of the nonexistence of an ego, or is our awareness of a
self merely in abeyance during these experiences (as with a sense of time)?
Are these experiences any more relevant to the issue than Cotard’s
Syndrome? Most unenlightened people may be willing to accept the
impermanence of material objects but not of a self. In addition, without a
self, there are philosophical problems of identity and continuity over time.
Traditions accepting rebirth also have to deal with the problem of karmic
effects occurring in different lifetimes. But as previously noted, many
neuroscientists and philosophers today deny such an ego: the sense of self is
merely another mental function and not an indication of a separate entity.
The concept of “I” is, as in Buddhism, simply a useful convention for a
constantly changing bundle of aggregates.
      But most mystical traditions accept that there is an underlying
transcendent self that is discovered once the false sense of a phenomenal
ego is destroyed: we are not our thoughts and emotions—there is an
underlying silence and stillness to our consciousness that is the real us.26
Buddhism may be an exception, although the Buddha did not talk about the
state of the enlightened after death.27 To Christians and Muslims, there is an
immortal soul, and most reject a cycle of rebirths (although some early
Christians and many Sufis accepted it)—our fate in the eternal life that is
awaiting us is based on our actions or beliefs in this one life, after perhaps a
temporary side trip to purgatory. Judaism does not have as strong a tradition
of belief in any life after death, but the mystical Hasidic Jews do accept it,
and some Kabbalists seemed to have accepted a form of multiple rebirths.
To Indian mystics, enlightenment ends our cycle of rebirth, although there
is no agreement on what happens after our final death. All agree that the
enlightened are out of the realm of rebirths generated by desire (unless they
voluntarily choose to remain), but they may be an isolated self (as in
Samkhya and Jainism), or disappear (as in Advaita), or have a life in
communion with God (as in bhakti theism). Or the issue simply is not
discussed (as in Buddhism). Thus, while all mystics speak of the experience
of the end of desires generated by a false sense of ego, the theories on
human destiny after death depend in part on conceptions of a person and of
transcendent realities.