The Principle of Credulity
Are there nonempirical grounds to establish the doctrines of a specific
tradition or at least the more basic claim that introvertive mystics
experience a transcendent reality? Some Christian philosophers and
theologians today who subscribe to a reliabilist theory of knowledge invoke
“the principle of credulity” under which we should accept experiencers’
claims until it can be shown that the experiences are based on some
unreliable mechanism or it is overridden by other considerations that defeat
the claims (e.g., Swinburne 1991: 303–18). In the case of transcendent
experiences, a second requirement is that the existence of transcendent
realities must not seem very unlikely on philosophical grounds. But as long
as philosophers are split on the issue, it is hard to argue that one can only be
rational if one concludes that it is very unlikely that such realities exist.
      The principle goes back to Thomas Reid’s common-sense response to
David Hume’s skepticism: our beliefs about the existence of the external
world, the past, and other minds are not products of rational arguments or
any inferences; rather, we simply have innate capacities that generate such
beliefs; when these capacities are operating properly and under the
appropriate circumstances, it is rational for us to accept the beliefs they
produce. The skeptics’ unanswerable demands for certainty can simply be
ignored. Thus, these thinkers reverse Cartesian doubt and argue that we
should believe experiential claims unless we have good reason not to. And
mystical experiences apparently do occur in physically and psychologically
healthy persons without damaging their well-being (e.g., Hood 1997). Thus,
this principle, they argue, gives a prima facie reason to believe what mystics
claim to have experienced and shifts the burden of proof to the naturalists to
show that all mystical experiences are somehow pathological and not
reliable cognitive experiences (Franks Davis 1989: 101; also see Newberg,
D’Aquili, & Rause 2002: 146–47).
      But naturalists believe that these experiences result from purely natural
neural mechanisms that even if functioning properly mislead experiencers
into thinking they have realized something transcendent, and this ipso facto
shows that these mechanisms are obviously unreliable for generating
beliefs. At a minimum, the plausibility of natural explanations must
undercut the epistemic confidence that mystics may have in their own
experiences—how can they unreservedly commit themselves when there is
a very real possibility of delusion? Why do someone’s mystical experiences
typically just happen to “confirm” the doctrines that that person already
holds and not another tradition’s? Again, mystics believe that it is some
highly specified reality that is verified, not an abstract “ultimate reality” or
“something more to reality.” Thus, the competing interpretations of either
type of introvertive experiences raise a problem here: if mystics disagree
among themselves about what is experienced, why should we treat these
experiences as reliable sources of knowledge? If one interpretation is
correct, then ipso facto all mystics who dispute that interpretation are
wrong. This means that many mystics, perhaps the majority, misunderstand
their own experiences.
      One cannot brush aside the issue the way the theologian Richard
Swinburne attempts by claiming that all transcendent concepts are merely
different names for God (1991: 316)—e.g., Brahman is not merely a name
for God since it is nonpersonal in nature, traditionally has no moral
concerns for the phenomenal world and its creatures, and does not hear
prayers or speak to beings. Swinburne also invokes a “principle of
testimony” in order that the faithful can rely on the experiences of others
(ibid.: 322–25). But experiencers can be misled by the phenomenology of
mystical experiences and thus be honestly mistaken as to what is
experienced; they may also automatically read in their tradition’s highly
ramified concepts. Thus, we cannot rely on the reports of others to
determine the truth of mystical knowledge-claims, no matter what we think
of their character.
      Also remember that many who undergo mystical experiences today see
no cognitive significance in them at all—to them, they are merely exotic
experiences stimulated by drugs or other artificial triggers that are subject to
a naturalistic reduction.7 That mystics must weigh different types of
mystical experiences against each other (as discussed in chapter 1) also
means that no inevitable judgment of the cognitive significance of any one
type of mystical experience is given.
      All of this is very damaging: if many, if not most, mystics must be
misunderstanding their experiences, this radically undercuts the alleged
reliability of mystical experiences and thus the credibility of any mystical
knowledge-claims. How can mystics commit to their own doctrines and
traditions in that case? Agnosticism should result. Thus, critics see the
principle of credulity as a “principle of gullibility” unless mystical claims
can be justified as valid on other grounds—asserting that such claims
should be accepted unless there are grounds to reject them is not enough.
And finding such positive grounds is difficult. For example, as will be
discussed in the next chapter, we cannot determine on neurological grounds
alone whether a mystical experience is an authentic experience of a
transcendent reality or whether experiencers merely mistakenly take it to be
so. So too, the commonality of mystical experiences around the world does
not necessarily mean they are veridical, but only that we are all constituted
the same way with regard to these experiences. The sense of profundity and
bliss and the great emotional impact are also irrelevant, as are any potential
psychological or physical benefits of meditation—these could occur just as
well if the cognitive claims are false and the experiences are the product
only of the brain. Thus, to critics, even if the principle applies to sense-
experience, there are no good reasons to believe that mystical experiences
are not delusional, and thus the principle should not be applied to mystical
experiences. And there is a division over whether mystical experiences are
veridical that does not occur for sense-experiences; thus, the principle may
apply to sense-experience but not obviously apply to mystical experiences.
In sum, saying that we simply should assume they are veridical unless they
are shown to be delusional does seem to be question-begging.
      The naturalist view leads to a radical skepticism concerning all
mystical claims. In addition, if all mystical knowledge-claims are equally
well grounded in experiences, the principle of credulity leads to a
paradoxical pluralism among mystics of equally acceptable conflicting
knowledge-claims. That is, even if we use the principle to conclude that we
should accept that introvertive mystics experience some transcendent
reality, nevertheless the beliefs conflict over what that reality is taken to be.
The distinction between interpretation and experience occurs here in a way
it does not in sense-experience. At a minimum, this means that even if
mystics are cognitive of some transcendent reality the principle of credulity
is not a good reason by itself to assume the truth of the specific beliefs of
any particular tradition. The cases for each tradition’s set of doctrinal
knowledge-claims would have to be examined to see if there are good
reasons to accept them.