Can Mystical Experiences Be Studied Scientifically?
Naturalists who reduce the mind to the brain or who entirely eliminate
subjectivity believe that studying the brain simply is studying consciousness
(see Jones 2013: 98–102). But for antireductionists, there is an issue here:
can experiences be studied scientifically? If science can study experiences,
the scientific study of meditators and persons undergoing mystical
experience potentially adds a new way to study mystical experiences, not
merely the brain and physiology. But this leads to the very real issue of
whether the subjectivity inherent in any experience can be studied
scientifically at all. It is one thing to identify the neurobiological correlates
of an experience and quite another to study the “lived” experience itself. In
consciousness studies in general, there is the problem of the “felt” aspects
of such states as sense-experience and pains—“qualia”—versus the
physical activity in the brain occurring during those experiences (see ibid.:
106–109, 122–24). Any causal property of consciousness would also be
distinct from the qualia. Because qualia remain experientially distinct from
brain mechanisms, they cannot be explained away by identifying the base in
the brain permitting them to occur—the first-person sensation of seeing the
greenness of grass is not reducible to the sum of the physical events
occurring when we look at grass.
      That consciousness is itself a mystery is revealed by the fact that
scientists and philosophers cannot agree on what exactly they are studying
or come up with a common definition. When scientists speak of a “science
of consciousness” today, they are still referring to identifying neural or
other bodily correlates of conscious events, not to studying the subjective
side of these events.6 It is not a science of consciousness itself—in fact,
based on science, there is no reason today to believe that consciousness
exists. Identifying the correlates in the body of particular conscious events
(e.g., identifying the areas of the brain that are active when moral
judgments are being made) or explaining how these events arose is not
getting into the conscious events themselves. Merely identifying the neural
correlates of a conscious event tells us nothing about what consciousness is,
nor does it explain why it exists. Every conscious event may well have a
neural correlate, but mere correlation does not address the fundamental
issues of how or why consciousness emerges or whether changes in
consciousness can cause changes in the neural base or why conscious
events are correlated with material events at all—indeed, a correlation of
phenomena is not an explanation of anything but only something new that
needs an explanation itself.
      Most basically, there does not appear to be any way to study the
subjectivity of a person’s consciousness itself by objective, third-person
means. No doubt scientists could conduct brain-imaging studies to
demonstrate the differences in the activity of cerebral structures occurring
while someone is listening to Beethoven or listening to white noise—but
would this mean that this experience is explained by the activity of a
specific brain region and that this is all there is to it (Sloan 2006: 253)?
Subjectivity is not phenomenal, i.e., it is not an object that can be presented
for study. There simply is no way to present subjectivity itself for inspection
or testing by others. Scientists can show that our conscious states are
affected by changes in brain states, but this does not mean that
consciousness is necessarily a product of matter—the brain states still may
be only the material bases needed to allow a separately existing
consciousness to appear in different ways. With their success in the study of
brain activity, it is easy to see why neuroscientists may miss the
philosophical issues and claim to be producing a “theory of consciousness.”
But as things stand, neuroscientists are only studying something closely
associated with the appearance of consciousness in us—its bodily
underpinnings—and not consciousness itself. They study the state of the
brain during an experience, not the experience itself or experience in
general. Even if the mind and the brain are materially identical, there is an
“inside” to experiences that cannot be studied from the “outside” by
examining the brain.
     In short, any third-person experience of brains does not give us
knowledge of anything but an object, and subjectivity cannot be made into
an object. Neurological scanning can only reveal the correlates of
experience—the observable bodily responses—not the “subjective”
consciousness itself. It can only show what the brain is doing or not doing
during an experience, but not the experience itself. Even the emerging
technology that “reads minds” only reads brain states, not experiences. No
scientific account of the mechanisms active during sense-experience or self-
awareness can make us understand what it is like actually to experience
those states. In sum, no accounts of phenomena in purely third-person terms
would ever even suggest the existence of, much less explain, the subjective
qualities that constitute the bulk of our conscious life (Shear & Jevning
1999: 189).
     This general inability of one person to witness what another one
experiences applies equally to mystical and meditative experiences. Even if
previous experiences can be reproduced by the meditators themselves
during scientific experiments, the inability of others to see what is going on
will always limit a “science of meditation.” Moreover, even if others could
in fact duplicate the physiological state of the brain of an enlightened
mystic through meditation, how do we know the subjective state of
consciousness is also being duplicated? Identifying what is going on in the
brain when a mystical experience occurs is one thing; what meditators
actually experience—the felt sense of selflessness, unity, timelessness, or
whatever—is another. A science of meditation is not achieved by a science
of a meditator’s brain. Only reductive materialists would disagree. And it
must be admitted that as of yet little is known about the neurobiological
processes involved in meditation and about its possible long-term impact on
the brain (Lutz et al. 2007: 500). The biological studies of meditation have
not produced anything dramatic about what is occurring during meditation.
Indeed, scientific studies to date, as Richard Sloan says, reveal the “entirely
unremarkable findings” that during meditation the areas of the brain
associated with concentration and attention show increased activity
compared to other regions (2006: 247–49).