Mystical Paths
Today people meditate for health benefits and to focus attention, but the
traditional objective of a mystical way of life is not for those reasons or to
attain exotic experiences: it is to correct the way we live by overcoming our
basic misconception of what is in fact real and thereby experiencing reality
as it truly is, as best as humanly possible. One must become directly aware
of reality, not merely gain new information about the world. Through the
mystical quest, we come to see the reality present when the background
conceptual structuring to our awareness is removed from our mind—either
experiencing in extrovertive states the phenomenal world independently of
our conceptualizations and manipulations, or experiencing in introvertive
experiences the normally concealed transcendent source of the self or of the
entire natural realm free of all other mental content. No new messages from
a transcendent reality are revealed (although mystics may also have such
experiences). Thus, a mystical quest begins with the notion that reality is
not constructed as we normally think and leads to a new way of seeing it:
the world we experience through sense-experience and normal self-
awareness is in fact not a collection of independently existing entities that
can be manipulated to satisfy an independently existing ego. And by
correcting our knowledge and our perception, we can align our lives with
what is actually there and thereby ease our self-inflicted suffering.
      Of particular importance is the misconception involved in the “I-Me-
Mine” complex (Austin 1998, 2006): we normally think we are an
independent, self-contained entity, but in fact this “self-consciousness” is
just another function of the analytical mind—one that observes the rest of
our mental life. By identifying with this function, we reify a separate entity
—the “self” or “ego”—and set it off against the rest of reality. We see
ourselves as one separate entity in a sea of distinct entities, and our ego then
runs our life without any conscious connection to the source of its own
being. This error (called avidya in Indian mysticism) is not merely the
absence of correct knowledge but an active error inhibiting our seeing
reality as it is: there is no separate self-existing “ego” within the field of
everyday experience but only an ever-changing web of mental and physical
processes. There is no need to “kill the ego” because there is no actual ego
to remove to begin with—what is needed is only to free our experience
from a sense of ego and its accompanying ideas and emotions and thereby
see what is actually there.
      More generally, the error is that our attention is constricted by
conceptualization. The inner quest necessary for overcoming this
falsification involves a process characterized in different traditions as
“forgetting” or “fasting of the mind”—i.e., emptying the mind of all
conceptual content, and in the case of the depth-mystical experience the
elimination of all sensory input and other differentiated mental content. The
Christian Meister Eckhart spoke of an “inner poverty”—a state free of any
created will, of wanting anything, of knowing any “image,” and of having
anything; such a state leads to a sense of the identity with the being of the
Godhead that is beyond God (McGinn 2006: 438–43). Anything that can be
put into words except “being” encloses God, and we need to strip away
everything in this way of knowing and become one (Eckhart 2009: 253–
55). In medieval Christian terminology, there is a radical “recollecting” of
the senses and a “purging” of the mind of all dispositional and cognitive
content, especially a sense of “I.” This involves a calming or stilling of
mental activity—a “withdrawal” of all powers of the mind from all objects.
It is a process of “unknowing” all mental content, including all prior
knowledge.13
      Sometimes theists characterize God as “nothing” to emphasize that he
is not a thing among the things in the universe. Such negative terminology
emphasizes that mystics are getting away from the world of differentiation,
but mystics affirm that something real is involved in introvertive mystical
experiences: through this emptying process, mystics claim that they become
directly aware of a transcendent power, not merely conceive a new idea or
interpretation of the world. Nor does “forgetting oneself” mean desiring to
cease to exist: in the words of the medieval English author of the Cloud of
Unknowing in his “Letter of Private Counsel,” this would be “madness and
contempt of God”—rather, mystical forgetting means “to be rid of the
knowledge and feeling” of independent self-existence. The result is an
awareness where all sensory, emotional, dispositional, and conceptual
apparatuses are in total abeyance. And yet throughout the process, one
remains awake—indeed, mystics assert that only then are we as fully
conscious as is humanly possible.
      Medieval Christian Franciscans and Dominicans debated whether the
will or the intellect was the higher power of the soul—and thus whether
love or knowledge is primary—although the consensus was that both are
needed. The path to enlightenment is usually seen as an ascent, and various
traditions divide it into different stages. In Christianity, since Origen of
Alexandria the path has traditionally been divided into three phases:
purgation, illumination, and union. Other traditions divide the quest
differently. Some, such as Sufism and Buddhism, have many stages or
levels of development and attainment. But progress is not steady, nor are all
the experiences positive. There is also distress and anxiety and periods in
which there is no progress—arid “dark nights of the soul” as John of the
Cross called them in which he felt that God was absent and not working.
One also may become satisfied with a blissful state on the path—what Zen
Buddhists call the “cave of Mara”—and remain there without attaining
enlightenment. Shri Aurobindo spoke of an “intermediate zone” where a
mystic believes he or she has attained enlightenment but has not and may
end up indulging selfish desires. The Christian Theologia Germanica also
warns against leaving images too soon and thereby never being able to
understand the truth aright. There are also attacks of apparently “demonic”
forces, although these may be only our normal conscious and subconscious
mind not giving up without a fight—the mind may reassert itself during
meditation in the form of anxiety and fear. There may also be visions and
other alternative states of consciousness.14 Thus, William James can rightly
refer to “diabolical mysticism” (1958: 326).15 There may also be visions
and other altered states of consciousness. And after a depth-mystical
experience, the analytical mind also returns quickly.
      “Meditation” broadly defined involves an attempt to calm the mind by
eliminating conceptualizations, dispositions, and emotions. In no mystical
tradition can meditation be reduced simply to breathing exercises. Overall,
meditation has two different tracks. In the Buddhist Eightfold Path, it is the
distinction between “right concentration” (samadhi) and “right
mindfulness” (smriti). The former focuses attention on one subject, thereby
stabilizing consciousness and culminating in one-pointed attention; the
latter frees experience by removing conceptual barriers to perception and
thereby “expanding” it to a “pure awareness” that mirrors the flow of what
is actually real as it is presented to the mind unmediated by
conceptualizations. In the terms of the Yoga Sutras, the mind becomes clear
as a crystal and shapes itself to the object of perception. There is
neurological evidence supporting the claim that mindfulness meditation
helps working memory and the ability to maintain multiple items of
attention, and that focusing techniques increase perceptual sensitivity and
visual attention (e.g., MacLean et al. 2010).
      There are many different meditative techniques within each track, and
not all are introvertive—e.g., Buddhist calming techniques (shamatha),
concentration techniques focusing all consciousness with or without an
object and with or without conceptions (savikalpa and nirvikalpa samadhi),
Buddhist insight techniques (vipashyana) using one’s stabilized focus to see
the nature of internal and external realities leading to insight (prajna),
visualizing objects, relaxation techniques, extrovertive mindfulness
techniques involving walking or working, repetitive prayer, ecstatic dance
or other activities that overload the senses (including music, incense and
flowers, and food and drink), ritualized activities (e.g., archery or
gardening), repetition of words or movements, and fasting (see Andresen
2000; Shear 2006).16 Repetition of a word or phrase as a tool initially keeps
the analytical mind occupied while the meditator works to calm other
aspects of the mind; eventually one becomes “one” with the words, as a
dancer becomes one with a dance, and the phrase no longer interferes with
one’s awareness. One no longer has the thought “I am repeating this phrase”
or any sense of a self separate from the actions. Different aspects of the
inner life can be the subject of practice: attention, feelings, bodily
awareness, and so on. There are even contradictory practices—e.g.,
celibacy versus sexual excess, unmarried or married, whirling Dervishes
versus silent Sufis, or cultivating dispassion versus bhakti theistic
enthusiastic devotion. (It should also be noted that meditating rigidly
through a set technique for years may itself lead merely to a new mental
habit and not to freedom from the conceptualizing process.) Mystical
traditions also have discursive analytical exercises less directly related to
emptying the mind (e.g., koans or studying texts). But no techniques belong
inherently to only one tradition. Cultivation may cover many facets of life
as with the Buddhist Eightfold Path and the Yoga Sutras’ Eight-Limbed
Path. So too, in all religions there are institutions such as monasteries and
convents with elaborate sets of rules for instruction and social support.
      Meditators may practice different techniques, including techniques
from both tracks since each track can aid the other in calming and focusing
the mind. So too, both extrovertive and introvertive mystical experiences
may occur on the path to “enlightenment” (i.e., the permanent eradication
of a sense of an independent phenomenal ego). Experiences may be partial
and not involve the complete emptying of a sense of ego. So too, theistic
mystics may have progressively deeper experiences of a god. Extrovertive
mystical experiences can also transition to introvertive ones, but the
physiology of the experiencers then changes (Hood 2001: 32–47; Dunn,
Hartigan, & Mikulas 1999). Different types of nonmystical religious
experiences may also occur. In addition, different or more thoroughly
emptied mystical experiences may occur after enlightenment.
      Cultivating selfless awareness is central to mystical ways of life, but it
should be noted that classical mystics actually discuss mystical experiences
very little—how one should lead one’s life, the path to enlightenment,
knowledge, and the reality allegedly experienced are more often the topics.
Traditionally, the goal is not any momentary experience but a continuous
new existence: the mystical quest is not completed with any particular
experience but with aligning one’s life with the nature of reality (e.g.,
permanently uniting one’s will with God’s). The knowledge allegedly
gained in mystical experiences is utilized in a continuing way of life. The
reality supposedly experienced remains more central than any inner state of
mind. Most mystical texts are not meditation manuals but discussions of
doctrines, and to read all mystical texts as works about the psychology of
different states of consciousness is to misread them badly in light of modern
thought. Even when discussing inner mental states, mystics refer more to a
transformation of character or an enduring state of alignment with reality
than to types of “mystical experiences,” including any transitional
“enlightenment experiences” that end a sense of self. This does not mean
that cultivating the special mystical experiences is not the defining
characteristic of mysticism or that one could attain the enlightened state
without any altered states of consciousness. It only means that mystics
value most the reality experienced and the long-lasting transformed state of
a person in the world and not any state of consciousness or momentary
experiences, no matter how insightful. Even if a mystic values the
experience of a transcendent reality over all doctrines, still the resulting
transformed state of a person is valued more.
     But mystics do claim that they realize a reality present when all the
conceptual, dispositional, and emotional content of the mind is removed.
Mystical experiences and states of consciousness are allegedly cognitive.
Mystics claim to have a direct awareness of the bare being-in-itself—the
“is-ness” of the natural realm of things apart from the conceptual divisions
that we impose—or of a direct contact with a transcendent reality whereby
they gain a new knowledge of reality. Both their knowledge and their will
are corrected (since the individual will is based on the sense of an
independent ego within the everyday world that is now seen to be baseless);
and, free of self-will, mystics can now align their life with the way reality
truly is and enjoy the peace resulting from no longer constantly trying to
manipulate reality to fit our own artificial images and ego-driven emotions
and desires.