Emotions, Values, and Beliefs
Danto also raised an issue related, not to the presuppositions of morality,
but to the emotions associated with morality: how can mystical even-
mindedness be compatible with compassion or any other concern with
others? But this objection also has problems. First, even-mindedness relates
only to the mystic’s reaction to the possible effect of an action on him- or
herself, not to the impact on others. Mystics are being even-minded to their
own pain and pleasure—not necessarily to the effect of their actions on
others. Being disinterested in the consequences of one’s actions for oneself
does not require being uninterested in the consequences for others. There
would be an inward emotional passivity and quiet of dispassion, but this
need not mean “quietism” in the sense of the absence of action. Thus, one
can be detached (concerning an action’s effect on oneself) and
compassionate (toward others) at the same time—indeed, it can be argued
that the former is valuable for cultivating other-regardingness. Second,
even-mindedness may lead to a radically impartial other-regardingness
toward all, even if partiality toward one’s own family or friends seems
morally necessary to us. Third, being personally detached in circumstances
where others are emotional may in fact be morally more desirable, even if
one’s actions then come across as cold and almost machinelike.
      Danto also raised the prospect that mystical values are incompatible
with moral ones (1976: 42–45). That is, the evaluative priorities for mystics
always relate to a particular mystical goal, not to moral concerns for others.
In short, the mystics’ transcendent values always take priority over
morality. The goal of life for mystics thus must conflict with morality. The
mystical experience revalues everything: the mystic’s world is so different
from ours that our principles do not apply. All the distinctions we make in
the “dream” are no longer of concern. The enlightened no longer see the
rope as a snake, but see it as it really is, and the unenlightened’s concerns
with the “snake” evaporate. So too with the unenlightened’s morality: once
enlightened, one sees that there are no real “persons” to help, and moral
concerns end. One cannot even speak of a moral dimension to mysticism,
because the possibility of ordering mystical values with unenlightened
moral ones is destroyed.
      However, moral values may be part of a mystic’s mystical values.
Remember again that the aim of mysticism is not mystical experiences but a
life aligned with the way reality truly is. If the fundamental reality that a
mystic accepts is deemed a compassionate self-emptying reality, then that
mystic’s enlightened life aligned with that reality will reflect morality. For
the Christian mystics, morality is built into the ground of reality: emulating
the way of God (imitatio dei) means an “active” life of moral action
integrated into a “contemplative” one. So too with Jewish mystics walking
in the ways of God. For Mahayana bodhisattvas, morality is not a matter of
reflecting a transcendent reality; rather, morality is built into the path and
the life of supreme enlightenment (bodhi). Doing good for others may also
help oneself, but that does not make the act selfish. Here, Buddhist
bodhisattvas gain a greater goal than mere enlightenment (nirvana) by
being other-regarding, but they are no less moral because of that. In
Daoism, impartiality and compassion or great humaneness are part of the
Way. None of these mystics’ values are antithetical to morality, and
morality becomes part of both the path and the enlightened life of such
mystics. Thus, merely because mystics try to align their lives with reality
does not mean that morality may not be of supreme value. This may also
lead to altruism, i.e., going beyond the basic requirement of morality to help
others even if one incurs a loss to oneself. Thus, far from mysticism being
necessarily antithetical to morality, morality can become a central value in a
mystical ways of life.
      Thus, none of the points Danto raised show that mystical experiences
necessarily conflict with morality. William Wainwright correctly argues
that, while there are no “logical or epistemic connections” between mystical
consciousness and morality, mysticism is compatible with morality and
there may be significant psychological or social connections between them
(1981: 224–26). One need not be a mystic to be moral or vice versa.
Instead, mystical experiences are compatible with a variety of beliefs and
values. Thus, mystical experiences cannot be said either logically to ground
our sense of morality in the structure of reality or to require beliefs that
preclude morality. They are morally neutral. But mystical selflessness is
compatible with morality and can even increase a mystic’s prior moral
concern for others by extending the range and depth of such a concern.
      Thus, mystics’ beliefs, ethical values, and valued emotions are not
necessarily in conflict with morality. Christians routinely claim that the
mystical experiences Christians have are superior to those of others because
Christian mystics are moral, and that the test of a genuine mystical
experience is whether it bears fruit in good works (e.g., Matthew 7: 15–20).
Stace and many other scholars also argue that a mystical experience or a
mystical way of life that is not expressed in moral action is not “authentic,”
“real,” “final,” “complete,” “true,” or “genuine.” For instance, the Hindu S.
N. Dasgupta stated, “There can be no true mysticism without real moral
greatness” (1971: viii). However, any ethical criterion of a “true” mystical
experience or enlightened state must be rejected, since the possibility of
moral indifference is a very real option for mystics. (Other problems with
such a pragmatic test were raised in chapter 3.) That morality and social
concerns are valued cross-culturally in the modern world may account for
these assessments today—we would hold mystics accountable for their
morally significant actions. But not all mystics from all eras and all cultures
reflect our current concerns and values.10
      In sum, mystical values are oriented around enlightenment, not
necessarily around moral concern, and while the two sets of values are not
incompatible, they do remain logically independent. Morality can inform a
way of life, but the moral concern for others must come from a source
outside of any mystical experience, as would the specifics on how to help
others. Mystical experiences only get mystics to a state of selflessness—for
that space to be positively filled with other-regardingness, another step is
required. This raises the important question of where the beliefs and values
in a mystical way of life come from (as discussed below).