PHILOSOPHY
     of
 MYSTICISM
PHILOSOPHY
     of
 MYSTICISM
Raids on the Ineffable




  Richard H. Jones
Published by State University of New York Press, Albany

© 2016 State University of New York

All rights reserved

Printed in the United States of America

No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written
permission. No part of this book may be stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by
any means including electronic, electrostatic, magnetic tape, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise without the prior permission in writing of the publisher.

For information, contact State University of New York Press, Albany, NY
www.sunypress.edu

Production, Ryan Morris
Marketing, Michael Campochiaro

                       Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Jones, Richard H., 1951–
   Philosophy of mysticism : raids on the ineffable / Richard H. Jones.
       pages cm
Includes bibliographical references and index.
   ISBN 978-1-4384-6119-9 (hardcover : alk. paper)
   ISBN 978-1-4384-6120-5 (e-book)
   1. Mysticism. I. Title.

   B828.J73 2016
   204’.2201—dc23 2015027728

                                      10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
                             Contents



Preface
             Postmodernist Concerns
             Methodological Issues
             The Analytical Philosophical Approach

1 Mysticism and Mystical Experiences
             Mystical Experiences
             Mystical Paths
             Extrovertive Mystical Experiences
             Mindfulness
             Introvertive Mystical Experiences
             Depth-Mystical Experiences
             Mystical Enlightenment
             A Typology of Mystical Experiences
             Weighting Mystical Experiences

2 Mystical Knowledge and Religious Ways of Life
             Experience and Knowledge
             Are There Genuine Mystical Experiences?
             Attribution Theory
             The Depth-Mystical Experience and Its Conceptualizations
             Mystical Experiences and Mystical Ways of Life
             Constructivism
             Nonconstructivism
             Constructivism and the Depth-Mystical Experience
             Can the Constructivism Dispute be Resolved?
              The Possibility of Mystical Insight

3 Are Mystical Experiences Cognitive?
             Can Nonmystics Judge the Veridicality of Mystical
             Experiences?
             What Can Mystics Claim to Know?
             Mysticism and Empiricism
             The Principle of Credulity
             The Analogy to Sense-Perception
             Problems of Justifying Specific Doctrinal Claims
             The Limitation of Any Mystical Claim to Knowledge
             Can Mystical Knowledge-Claims Be Compared?
             Do Mystical Knowledge-Claims Genuinely Conflict?
             Can One Mystical System Be Established as Best?
             Is It Rational to Accept Mystical Knowledge-Claims?
             “Properly Basic Beliefs”
             Ultimate Decisions

4 The Scientific Study of Mystics and Meditators
              Scientific Study Versus Mystical Practices
              Are New Theories of the Mind Needed?
              Can Mystical Experiences Be Studied Scientifically?
              Scientific Explanations of Mystical Experiences
              Sociocultural Explanations of Mystical Experiences
              Explaining Away Mystical Experiences
              Problems with Sociocultural Explanations
              Problems with Physiological Explanations
              Do Natural Triggers Produce Mystical Experiences?
              Natural Phenomena and Mystical Insights
              The Compatibility Problem
              Applying Occam’s Razor
              Our Epistemic Situation
              Is Naturalism or a Transcendent Alternative More Plausible?
              The Neutrality of Science

5 Mysticism and Metaphysics
              Mystical Metaphysics
              The Status of the World
              The Nature of Transcendent Realities
              Consciousness
              The Self
              The Question of Mystical Union
              Mysticism and the Closure of Mystery

6 Mysticism and Language
             Ineffability
             The Mirror Theory of Language
             And Yet Mystics Continue to Talk
             An Analogy
             Silence
             Positive Characterizations of Transcendent Realities
             Mystical Utterances and Knowledge
             Negation
             Defending Mystical Discourse

7 Mysticism and Rationality
             Rationality and Styles of Reasoning
             Paradox
             Resolving Paradoxes
             Understanding the Paradoxical
             Nagarjuna’s Reasoning
             Mysticism and the Question of Universal Reason

8 Mysticism and Science
             Scientific and Mystical Approaches to Reality
             An Analogy
             Beingness and Science
             Mystical Experience Versus Scientific Measurement and
             Theorizing
             Indirect Avenues of Aid
             Science, Mysticism, and the Natural World
             The Difference in Content
              Science and Mystical Metaphysics
              Complementarity
              Reconciling Mysticism and Science

9 Mysticism and Morality
             The Basic Question of Compatibility
             Are Mystics Necessarily Moral?
             Mystical Selflessness and the Presuppositions of Morality
             Emotions, Values, and Beliefs
             “You Are That”
             A Metaphysics of Wholeness and Morality
             Factual Beliefs, Values, and Mystical Experiences
             “Beyond Good and Evil”
             Will Any Actions Do?
             Mystical Decision-Making
             Mystical Selflessness and Morality

Epilogue: The Demise of Mysticism Today
              The Antimystical Climate Today
              Accepting Mysticism Today
              A Mystical Revolution?
              A Thirst for Transcendence

Notes

References and Further Reading

Index
                                        Preface



          The greatest blessings come to us through madness, when it is sent as a gift of the gods.
          Heaven-sent madness is superior to man-made sanity.
                                                                                           —Plato



There are forces pulling and pushing against the study of mysticism today.
On the one hand, the rise of spirituality has drawn attention to mysticism,
and empirical research has suggested that mystical experiences may be
much more common than is generally accepted (Hardy 1983; Hood 2006).
Mystical experiences that occur either through cultivation or spontaneously
are often considered by the experiencers as the defining moments of their
lives. There also has been a recent surge of scientific interest in meditators
and in the neural and pharmacological bases and causes of mystical
experiences. On the other hand, there have been recent sex and money
scandals involving “enlightened” Zen and Hindu teachers, and there is the
general academic suspicion that mysticism is only a matter of subjectivity,
deliberate obscurantism, and irrationality.
     In Anglo-American philosophy, mysticism has remained a constant if
minor topic within philosophy of religion. Not all questions in philosophy
of mysticism are pertinent to more general philosophy, but many are
important to philosophy of religion and to philosophy more generally. What
is unique about mysticism is the purported contribution of exotic
experiences to mystical claims. Are these experiences “objective” in the
sense of revealing something about reality outside of the “subjective”
individual mind? Do mystical experiences reveal truths about the universe
that are not obtainable through science or reasoning about what other
experiences reveal to us? Do they reinforce scientific truths? Or do they
conflict with scientific truths? Or are they noncognitive and only a matter of
emotion? How is it possible to claim that a fundamental reality is
experienced when there is allegedly no experiencing subject or object
experienced? Why do mystics have trouble expressing what is allegedly
experienced in these experiences and not in ordinary cognitive experiences?
Are mystics blatantly irrational, speaking what turns out to be only
gibberish? Is morality ultimately grounded in mystical experiences, or are
mystics necessarily selfish and thus not moral at all? With such questions as
these, mysticism introduces issues not found in considering nonmystical
experiences and general religious ways of life by themselves.
      A current comprehensive treatment of the basic problems in this field
is long overdue. No major comprehensive book on philosophy of mysticism
has been published since Walter Stace’s Mysticism and Philosophy in 1960.
The closest is the important collection of essays published by William
Wainwright in 1981. Since then, a number of developments and new issues
have arisen—in particular, those raised by postmodernism and scientific
research.