Ineffability
Mystical literature is quite varied (see Keller 1978), and not all mystical
uses of language are declarative—prayers, parables, poetry, instructions,
and other aids for transforming others or evoking experiences fall into other
categories. But what is of interest here are the mystics’ cognitive claims,
i.e., the assertions about the nature of the experiences and of what is
experienced.1 But the “wholly other” nature of both mystical states of
consciousness and what is experienced there leads mystics to believe
language cannot apply. Mystics are caught in the dilemma of needing
conceptualizations but realizing that any conceptualizations introduce a
foreign state of consciousness. There are two problems. First, using
language requires a dualistic state of mind, and thus introducing language
drops mystics out of introvertive states of consciousness. This does not
occur with ordinary utterances, since experiences of objects and declarative
utterances about them both occur in the same state of consciousness. Even
mindful states involve awareness of distinctions and thus permit the use of
language. But any image of a transcendent reality is foreign to the reality
itself in a way that images of phenomenal objects in the natural universe are
not—transcendent realities are simply beyond our dualistic mind, and any
attempt to conceptualize them introduces mental objects. Second, any
concepts or statements about something transcendent will be misinterpreted
by the unenlightened as referring to an object among objects in the
phenomenal universe—an unusual object, granted, but simply like
something in an unchartered part of the phenomenal realm. All that the
unenlightened have are the mental objects produced by the analytical mind.
Thus, in an important sense the unenlightened do not know what they are
talking about when they use mystical concepts. The problem is not with one
particular language, but with any language: no language can be devised that
circumvents the problem, since all languages must have terms that make
distinctions, and any terms make what is experienced into an object of
consciousness, while what is experienced is free of distinctions and is not
an object of consciousness.2
      This causes mystics across the world to claim ineffability, i.e., what is
experienced is inexpressible in any words.3 In the words of Taittiriya
Upanishad 2.4: “Words and the mind turn back without reaching it.” In
many everyday contexts we often find that language is inadequate. The
strong emotions one feels cannot be adequately stated. Indeed, all
experiences are ineffable in one sense: we cannot adequately communicate
the subjective feel of any experience even if we know the appropriate labels
of our culture. Describing the taste of a banana to someone who has never
tasted one is impossible: we know the taste through experience, but how do
we describe it? Only once one has had the experience will any description
be understood. Similarly, stopping and trying to communicate what is
happening at the moment often drops us out of even ordinary experiences.
So too, any object of experience is ineffable in one way: any attempt to
describe what is utterly unique about anything—what differentiates it from
everything else—will necessarily fail, since descriptive terms all involve
perceived commonalities and general categories. Using any terms to
describe it will automatically group it with other things. Nominalists in the
West and Buddhist logicians in India were aware of this problem—to them,
“universals” are only a product of language and not components of reality.
But any object is also not ineffable: it is accurate to call a pen “a pen,” even
if it is only crudely “captured” by language. Thus, we do not consider
phenomenal objects to be “utterly beyond words.”
      Mystical experiences of course share these problems. So what is
unique to mystics’ claims of ineffability? Mystics allegedly directly know a
reality through their mystical experiences—so why can they not say
something about it? Why do they deny “the One” or “Brahman” works for
transcendent realities the way “a pen” accurately communicates for
phenomenal objects? It is not that mystics sense a vague, amorphous
“presence,” or have only a nebulous insight that is hard to put into words or
an inarticulatable sense of knowing something—the experience is a
“dazzling ray of light.” Again, the problem begins with the fact that by
speaking or even thinking, mystics must switch from a mystical awareness
to a dualistic state of consciousness: the mere use of language introduces a
mode of awareness foreign to experiencing the reality mystically. When we
speak of phenomenal objects, we merely rearrange the content of our
ordinary awareness—the state of awareness remains the same. The
abolition of the duality set up between subject and object causes the
problem in mysticism with language. Maitri Upanishad 6.7 sums it up:
“Where knowledge is of a dual nature (a knowing subject and a known
object), there indeed one hears, sees, smells, tastes, and also touches. The
self knows everything. But where knowledge is not of a dual nature—being
without action, cause, or effect—it is without speech, incomparable, and
indescribable. What is that? It is impossible to say.” Only by removing the
dualities by which both language and thought operate can we realize a
transcendent reality or experience beingness in an extrovertive mystical
experience. Thus, mystical experiences and what is experienced both
transcend language and thought.
      However, mystics do make knowledge-claims. If transcendent realities
exist, much about them may in fact not be relatable or comprehensible to
the analytical mind, but the works of mystics suggest that they think
something is. If what was experienced were truly ineffable, there would be
no basis for mystics to make any knowledge-claims or value-claims about it
or to deny other such claims. Ineffability cannot be the basis for any
insights—something vague might be retained from the experience, but there
would be no statable claims for mystics to make. What knowledge other
than that something real exists and is profound could there then possibly
be? What would be the insight into the nature of that reality that is given?
An “ineffable insight” is not possible. However, the insight occurs in
dualistic awareness when enlightened mystics see the significance of what
they experienced. There they can use language to state the alleged insight.4
Even if language cannot “capture” the ever-active flow of reality,
enlightened extrovertive mystics still use language, as their writings on how
language fails show. Introvertive mystics also speak of the nature of what is
experienced, even if the concepts used are of an abstract nature (e.g.,
oneness) or are terms from their religious tradition.
      Theistic mystics believe they have experienced a reality that is
personal in nature, and so they claim some definite things about God. God
is indescribable only in that he is so much greater than they can say, not
because they know nothing of him. That is, human formulations are not
wrong but hopelessly inadequate (Johnston 1978: 81). But theistic mystics
know that his mode of existence is utterly different than that of creatures,
and so they believe that all terms mislead: we make God into a being
comparable in some way to worldly beings, which he is not; hence, the
concept “a being” does not apply. Even just denoting a transcendent reality
as “transcendent” or “real” makes it an object, which it is not. Thus, mystics
deny the adequacy of all terms. Meister Eckhart said that we cannot say
anything true of God because God has no cause, no equal, and nothing from
creatures is comparable to God (2009: 197–98). Indeed, he said that God is
so much greater than anything that can be said that everything said about
him is more like lying than speaking the truth. For example, he can say that
God alone is good (2009: 300), but: “When I call God ‘good,’ I speak as
falsely as if I were to call white black” (see 1981: 80). God, the creator of
being, is so far above being in nonbeing (unwesen) that “I would be
speaking as falsely in calling God ‘a being’ as I would if I called the sun
pale or black” (2009: 342, 343).
      Thus, if mystical experiences were truly ineffable, a transcendent
reality may still be experienced and have a nature and we could still label it
“Brahman” or “God” or whatever, but it cannot be said to be known in any
other sense. There could be no insights to state and nothing to believe. No
mystical statement could be true or even meaningful. Mystics could not
answer David Hume’s question “How do you mystics, who maintain the
absolute incomprehensibility of the Deity, differ from sceptics or atheists,
who assert that the first cause of all is unknown and unintelligible?” The
result could be Ludwig Wittgenstein’s position: “A nothing would serve just
as well as a something about which nothing could be said” (Philosophical
Investigations, pt. 304). The experiences could not be evidence of any
reality—there could be nothing to say to support any claim or its denial.
William James’s characteristics of mystical experiences as both ineffable
and cognitive (1958: 380–81) would conflict. Nor could different
experiences be compared. Nor could what is experienced in one mystic’s
experience be identified with, or differentiated from, what is experienced in
another’s. But the fact that mystics, both theistic and nontheistic, still
distinguish what is an appropriate description from an inappropriate one
indicates that what is experienced has some distinctive character and that
mystics believe that they have experienced it. That is, something is retained
from even the depth-experience that is free of all differentiation, and thus
these experiences are not ineffable in this strong sense.
      In this way, the mystics’ use of “ineffability” is different from more
usual uses of the term. It is not simply hyperbole or an expression of the
emotional power of these experiences but something more substantive
about its mode of existence. However, what is experienced is not literally
“ineffable.” The mere fact that it can be labeled “ineffable” trivially means
that it is something in some sense that can be experienced. If such realities
were not experiencable at all and thus absolutely unknown, there would be
no experiential basis to believe that they existed or to say that they are
“unknowable” or “ineffable.” But to say “x is ineffable” means there must
be an x that is experienced. Or as Augustine said, God cannot be called
“ineffable” because this makes a statement about him. As the fifth-century
Indian grammarian Bhartrihari put it: “What is sayable (vachya) by the
word ‘unsayable’ (avachya) is made sayable by that word.” Many
philosophers think that this defuses the problem of ineffability: to say “x is
indescribable” is to describe it, and hence it is not ineffable.5 But more
remains to the issue here. Ineffability in mysticism should be understood in
another sense: as highlighting the wholly otherness of what is experienced
—i.e., nothing phenomenal can be predicated of what is experienced, and so
it cannot be expressed. In short, mystics are simply claiming that a reality
lies outside the domain of phenomenal predication.