Factual Beliefs, Values, and Mystical Experiences
If the world were a web of unaffectable monads, then concern for others
would be irrational, since we could not help them even if we wanted to.
Thus, the other extreme of metaphysics from Advaita’s oneness is also
incompatible with morality. But with any metaphysics short of these
extremes, we can help one another because we are not identical to the other
components of the web, or we can remain selfish, clinging to our part of
reality. Being moral or immoral is not tied to factual beliefs in that fashion.
Immorality is tied to selfishness, but selfishness, as just discussed, is a value
that can still be grounded in a holistic worldview. That Buddhists argue
murder is impossible because there is no self and the Bhagavad-gita argues
the same precisely because there is an eternal self should reveal that the
basic values are not based on metaphysics. That the latter justifies a war and
other apparent killing in our world also reveals more of the problem.
      Thus, there is no simple one-to-one correlation of beliefs and values.
Mystics may have essentially the same factual beliefs and yet differ with
regard to morality (e.g., Theravada versus Mahayana Buddhism). Or they
may have different metaphysical systems but have essentially the same
ethical codes (as with the classical philosophical schools of Hinduism). This
means that an ethos cannot be deduced from a worldview or vice versa. The
basic moral choice does not necessarily follow from the metaphysics, and
hence a value-choice remains. Thus, it is as much a mistake to assume that
all mystical traditions must be moral or have one set of values as it is to
assume that they all share one metaphysical system, or that differences in
metaphysics require differences in values. Mystical enlightenment may rule
out any selfish actions, but mystical factual beliefs do not dictate one set of
values or course of action: what one does about the rope once one sees it is
not a snake is not determined by seeing the rope correctly. Moreover, even
if a mystic adopts morality, moral mystics may still differ on the best way to
help others because of differences in factual beliefs and valuations of the
world. In short, we cannot deduce an enlightened “ought” from the
enlightened “is” or vice versa.14
      Thus, beyond its presuppositions, morality does not depend upon a
specific ontology. Values and ethics remain autonomous from factual
claims. However, one’s factual beliefs do set the horizon of one’s actions.
Not all metaphysical beliefs directly affect our actions, but belief-claims on
the nature of a person, the general nature of reality, expectations at death,
and the goals of life can affect our actions now. One only lives in the world
as one sees it—one acts according to the way the world “really is,” as
defined by one’s beliefs. Belief-claims also rule out some actions as
possible options. For enlightened mystics, selfish action is ruled out
because they do not believe an ego is an element of reality: they cannot
attach any importance to one pile of matter—their own body—just because
they are aware of subjectivity through it, when they know all consciousness
is one, or that nature is interconnected, or whatever is really the case as
defined by their tradition.
     In this way, mystics’ behavior depends on the factual beliefs of their
particular tradition. Such ideas set the context of a mystic’s actions. They
set up what seems “reasonable,” “obvious,” or “appropriate.” They
determine what needs correcting and what is the best type of help, since
being other-regarding does not require seeing from the impinged-on
person’s unenlightened point of view. For example, teaching related to
getting out of this world may well be deemed more important than
providing material aid in this life (e.g., Enneads 6.9.7). This can lead to an
other-worldly air among mystics who are focused on transcendent realities,
and to acts of “ruthless compassion” that appear cold. Mystics’ factual
beliefs can lead to actions that we might not deem moral but that do reflect
an other-regarding concern. Thus, as part of their “skillful means,”
bodhisattvas may even kill to help the “victim.” For example, a king
persecuting Buddhists was killed for his own karmic good, since it was seen
as necessary to prevent him from committing acts that would damage his
future rebirths (and the bodhisattva who did the “killing” was karmically
rewarded for his selfless act, since no real “person” was killed) (see Jones
2004: 195–98). Similarly, the range of the application of a moral precept
such as not to kill depends on factual beliefs. In India, noninjury is extended
to all sentient beings. Jainas carry this to extremes—e.g., wiping away a
spider’s web is considered an act of violence against the spider. The ideal
for enlightened Jainas is not to harm any being, thereby avoiding more
karma residue; thus, the ideal is to completely stop moving to avoid
harming any being in any way (and consequently starving to death).
     But mystical experiences are not tied to specific worldviews or value-
systems, nor do they determine particular factual beliefs or values in any
simple manner. That is, we cannot simply remove a sense of self and
automatically the “will of God” will appear: the content of what we should
do does not come from a mystical experience. This leads to the issue of
what role these experiences play in devising mystics’ beliefs and values.
Even mystical experiences with differentiated content supply no new
concrete factual beliefs, but only a sense of reality, oneness, immutability,
bliss, perhaps being loved, and egolessness. So too, the experiences are
empty of values beyond valuing the reality experienced, and perhaps a
sense of impartiality or love. Nor are specific norms deducible from
adopting a basic ethos of morality since that can be implemented
differently. Nor do mystical experiences have anything to offer on the
specifics of any ethical code, e.g., how to love others. Mysticism is about
the inner dimension of action, i.e., how the precepts are carried out. Mystics
other than monastics, hermits, and antinomians typically live by the same
rules as nonmystics. Only the difference in inner motivation separates
mystics from other members of a tradition—there is no separate “mystical
ethics” for the enlightened (unlike the rigorous codes of the path). That is,
mystical enlightenment changes the mystics’ dispositions but not the code
followed (unless mystics intentionally violate it for selfless reasons) and
perhaps not their actions. Thus, the experience of the vertical dimension of
beingness interacts with the horizontal dimension of ethics through the
inner dimension of how the mystic follows the code. Moreover, there may
be a major shift with mystical enlightenment in one’s factual point of view,
and yet one may still adhere to one’s pre-enlightened values and action-
guides. Thus, one’s actions may not show one’s new beliefs, although there
is also the possibility that actions themselves may change radically. Or their
actions may change by an expansion of the application of a tradition’s
values to more people or even to other species.
      Theists sense that love and caring is given in theistic mystical
experiences, but nontheists counter that this is only a misreading of the bliss
of a mystical experience. And because not even all theistic mystics claim
experiences of love in their introvertive mystical experiences, and
nontheists do not report experiences of love, it appears that these values,
along with morality, come from sources outside these experiences. This
means that Christian mystics who believe that “God is love” are bringing
that belief to their enlightened state—the belief is not the product of
mystical selflessness alone. So where does the value of love come from?
The answer is not as straightforward as constructivists believe. Mystics are
no doubt shaped by the value-system of the tradition in which they practice,
but mystical selflessness is also part of the experiential background shaping
the tradition’s value-system. As discussed in chapter 2, to say that mystical
experiences merely deepen previously held beliefs is wrong. The mystical
sense of selflessness and the reality experienced as impartial enter the
picture. Mystical experiences thus can shape values—in particular, if the
mystics adopt a concern for others, mystical selflessness leads toward
valuing greater compassion and greater impartiality, which are usually seen
as reflecting the fundamental reality. In sum, mystical experiences can
neither be given exclusive weight on values nor discounted totally as one
possible influence.
      In this way, mystics both reflect their culture and affect it. The
experience of selflessness and an impartial reality expands the mystics’
field of experiences and provides a new perspective on both the world and
ethical norms. It leads to greater impartiality in implementing whatever
norms are in place. Thus, moral mystics may be ethical innovators in their
traditions in expanding the range of other-regardingness. What Gershom
Scholem said of mystics applies to their values: mystics are rooted in their
tradition, but they transcend it, widen it, and even outgrow it; there is a
dialectic relation between the mystic and his or her tradition (1967: 9, 13).
Such mystics as the Mahayana bodhisattvas are paradigms of a moral life,
but the moral values that they exhibit did not come from new mystical
experiences or earlier Buddhism. Any moral critiques of earlier traditions
do not come simply from having more mystical experiences. The
innovation must come from other sources. When a new tradition such as the
Buddha’s arises, one must still look for the source of moral concern in other
influences—the initial enlightenment experience is not it, as the story of the
Buddha having to be convinced after his enlightenment to help others
indicates (see Jones 2004: 171). But, again, mystical experiences influence
those traditions through mystical selflessness, and thus the picture is
complicated.
      Since a moral concern cannot be said to be a necessary component of a
mystical experience or a mystical way of life, the study of where that
concern comes from shifts, from trying to examine mystical experiences
alone or treating mysticism in the abstract as having certain universal values
or having one stance on morality), to examining the beliefs, values,
intentions, and motives of specific mystics as evident in their actions and
teachings. Mystics typically see their values as objective features of reality,
but the comparative study of mysticism leads to a different result: not only
do mystical experiences not ground the moral sense in the structure of
reality, they are not the source of any specifics for an ethical code, and thus
do not contribute any solution to the question of relativism arising from the
diversity of social codes of conduct (see Jones 1993: 73–77).15 Rather,
mystical experiences are compatible with a great variety of moral and
nonmoral value-systems.