Mysticism and Morality




Morality doesn’t concern all of our actions and values, but how we deal
with other people. And it not merely a matter of conforming to a tradition’s
code of conduct, but of why we act as we do: to be moral, our actions must
be other-regarding, i.e., we must consider the welfare of the people on
whom our actions impinge and not merely our own interests. (See Jones
2004: 21–47 for this and other requirements of morality.) We need not be
exclusively other-regarding to be moral: we need not be a saint, a hero, or
even overly altruistic—we can advance our own interests and still be moral
as long as other-regardingness is a genuine part of our motives for acting.
But if we act only out of self-interest, our actions are not deemed moral, no
matter how beneficial their effects might be to others. Thus, motivation and
intentions, and not just actions themselves, matter in a moral assessment.1
     Some scholars argue that mysticism is the source of our sense of
morality, or that mystics are necessarily moral, or even that only mystics are
truly moral or compassionate since only they have escaped all self-
centeredness (e.g., Radhakrishnan 1948ab, 1951; Stace 1960a: 323–33). But
how could those who devote their lives to their own enlightenment not be
considered anything but selfish? Can the selflessness of mystical
enlightenment even be filled with an other-regarding concern? Indeed, some
have argued that mysticism and morality are not compatible (e.g.,
Schweitzer 1936; Danto 1987). Or may all mystical experiences be morally
neutral? Do the beliefs and values of mystical ways of life come from
mystical experiences or from the mystics’ particular religious tradition? The
emphasis on individuals’ cultivation and experiences also presents an issue:
is mysticism necessarily asocial and apolitical? Must mystics be antinomian
regarding the ethical code of their tradition—i.e., do they lack any interest
in maintaining social norms, or do some mystics even intentionally go
against them? Even when their acts have positive social effects, does their
inner focus change their moral status? What are we to make of Mahatma
Gandhi’s answer when asked why he was helping some poor villagers: “I
am here to serve no one else but myself, to find my own self-realisation
through the service of these village-folks,” adding “My national service is
part of my training for freeing my soul from the bondage of flesh. Thus
considered, my service may be regarded as purely selfish” (Chander 1947:
375).
      The philosophical issues surrounding mystical interpersonal actions
have typically been neglected or entirely screened out of scholars’ field of
vision. The usual level of analysis is that if mystics follow a code of
conduct, it is assumed that they must be moral, or that anything connected
to a religious summum bonum is by definition moral—most scholars do not
even see an issue here to discuss. All mystical traditions of course have
codes of conduct, normative ideals, and exemplars of conduct that cover
both actions toward other people and personal inner self-development.
Creating such codes may be a universal feature of human cultures. Scholars
routinely present the codes and ideals of religious ways of life, but
surprisingly few discuss the issue of why these are followed—in particular,
whether the codes are followed for selfish motives or out of a genuine
concern for the welfare of the people with whom mystics interact. Are we
simply to assume that because we value morality, codes and ideals are
always being followed out of a genuine concern for other people? Or may
people instead be being treated simply as means for a practitioner’s own
spiritual advancement, even if the people being affected are not actually
harmed? For example, do the religious donate to help others, or only to earn
merit for themselves? Consider the curious case of Burmese Buddhists
donating huts for a monk because he was so austere that he refused to live
in any hut (see Jones 2004: 3, 161–62): only the donors themselves
benefitted from their gifts by gaining merit for themselves since no one uses
the huts—indeed, the huts were built precisely because the monk would not
live in them. And are we also to assume that the factual beliefs entailed by
adherence to any code cannot conflict with the factual presuppositions
necessary for moral conduct? It is obviously easier to deal only with the
codes recorded in a tradition’s texts than to look at the “inside” of mystical
actions (a mystic’s intentions and motives for following a code), but it is
only by actually examining the latter that we can determine whether a
person is moral or not. Since motive and intention matter, we need a “thick”
description of explicit and implicit mystical beliefs and values, not merely
“thin” descriptions of cultural ethical codes and lists of virtues. The
presence or absence of such moral emotions as sympathy and compassion
also becomes relevant.