Are Mystics Necessarily Moral?
Walter Stace presented the classic mystical theory of morality. Mystical
experiences are the empirical, if not logical, justification of our moral
values since they are the human experiences out of which moral feelings
flow (1960a: 323; 1960b: 27). That is, the sense of separate individual
selves produces the egoism that is the source of conflict, grasping,
aggressiveness, selfishness, hatred, cruelty, malice, and other forms of evil;
this sense is abolished in the mystical consciousness in which all
distinctions are annulled (1960a: 324). Moral values arise out of mystical
experiences that have their source in the One or the Universal Self that is
the foundation of the world (ibid.: 326). Love and sympathy result from the
incipient and partial breaking down of the barriers that the sense of separate
selves has erected; when this breakdown is complete, it leads to the sense of
the identity of “I” and “you”—thus, love is a dim groping toward the
disappearance of individuality in the Universal Self that is part of the
essence of mysticism (ibid.: 329). Feelings of love and compassion are
components, or necessary and immediate accompaniments, of mystical
experiences. This is in fact the only source from which love flows into the
world (ibid.: 327). Obviously not all people are moral, but some faint
mystical sense is latent in all people (and perhaps animals) that influences
their feelings without their knowing or understanding it; without this sense,
there could be no such thing as love or even kindly feeling in human life,
and life would be a wholly unmitigated Hobbesian war of all against all, for
there is no rival nonmystical source of morality (ibid.: 324–25). So too, not
all mystics revel in their own experiences, but some are great workers in the
world (ibid.: 334–35).
      The idea that breaking down a sense of self-centeredness in a mystical
experience leads to a sense of sympathy for others is certainly plausible.
But whether this is the origin of our sense of morality is another issue.
Evolutionary psychologists offer a theory of an evolutionary origin of
morality based on group survival. Another theory is that the moral sense is
innate in human beings. Evidence of this is that babies begin to cry when
they hear other babies crying. This empathy occurs even within a few days
of birth, and thus well before they learn to speak and before they reach the
“mine, mine, mine!” stage in which they develop a sense of an independent
self. The same holds later for wanting to share. This suggests that sympathy
and a sense of connectedness are innate, being both prelinguistic and pre-
enculturation in origin. (Of course, selfish behaviour shows that any innate
moral sense can be overcome.) And if a moral sense arises later in life—
e.g., in the parent/child relation, or simply out of the social need for people
living together to find some way for everyone to survive and prosper. Such
approaches would lead us to doubt that mystical consciousness is the source
of morality.
      Equally important, not all enlightened mystics become moral, and thus
Stace’s theory of the historical origin of morality is hard to defend: there
would be nothing in an enlightened mystic’s mind emptied by a mystical
experience to impede a reversion to an innate moral state if it were the
source of morality and if morality is a necessary part of mystical states. Nor
does other-regardingness require that we abolish all self-centeredness with a
mystical experience. So too, one can be concerned with the welfare of
others without any feeling of love arising from the experienced sense of
selflessness. The nonmystical and the nonreligious can adopt a moral stance
based on no more than our common humanity or the fact that all sentient
animals suffer. Upon witnessing an execution, Leo Tolstoy said he needed
no more to conclude that nothing could ever convince him that killing a
human was right—he said that he understood that it was wrong, not with his
mind, but with his whole being. The development of moral maturity from
childhood to adulthood is often said to involve becoming less and less self-
centered and adopting more and more inclusive points of view—no
mystical experience is needed for that process to occur. This can be
extended to humanity as a whole through thought alone. One can adopt on
purely intellectual grounds a form of utilitarianism in which one values the
majority. In China, Mozi’s “universal love” is not based on any experience,
but on the belief that the radical impartiality of treating all people equally
reflects the actions of heaven/nature (tian). Indeed, animal rights advocates
would extend morality to animals for nonmystical reasons (e.g., simply
because animals feel pain).
      And even if mystical experiences were the origin of our sense of
concern for others, the problem that not everyone who has had a mystical
experience is moral persists. As Agehananda Bharati asserts, isolated
mystical experiences will not change an immoral and self-indulgent or
antisocial person into a moral one—in particular, the depth “zero-
experience” is a mode of consciousness that has no moral value or
implication (1976: 74–75)—if one was a stinker before the depth mystical
experience, one may remain so after it (ibid.: 53). The zero-experience does
not entail any beliefs or actions, although mystics typically believe the
experience legitimates and validates their tradition’s teachings (ibid.: 69).
Selfishness does not automatically fall away. An isolated experience of
selflessness may not change a person’s negative psychological
characteristics, but may in fact increase his or her sense of self-importance
and pride. Indeed, any narcissistic view of oneself may be reinforced or
even enhanced. The sense that one has been graced by God may increase a
sense of self-importance. R. C. Zaehner also points out that a connection
between mystical consciousness and loving action is not inevitable (1972,
1974a, 1974b, 1974c).5 A momentary experience of “cosmic
consciousness” will not necessarily make one either a religious or a moral
saint. Nor does mastering breathing techniques or other meditative
exercises have any bearing on one’s values.
      Being a mystical genius may require a change in character in a way
that greatness in other fields does not, but an active moral life need not be
part of it. Breaking down the sense of self may lead to release from
inhibitions and thus to the libertine indulgence of desires under the guise of
God’s will, as with antinomians, or to giving oneself over totally to an
immoral political cause such as Nazism. After cracking the sense of self,
Charles Manson followed a murderous path based on the belief “If God is
one, what is bad?” Or consider the morally questionable “perfect masters”
common in the West today. Followers of the Buddhist Chogyam Trungpa
Rinpoche had no problem with his open drunkenness and sexual
exploitation of followers. They considered him “deeply realized” and saw
no incompatibility of the two sides of his life: his apparent selfish
exploitation of his followers was merely his way of breaking down their
sense of self. So too, the sexual promiscuity and violence of Bhagwan
Shree Rajneesh’s followers is well documented.6
      In sum, a mystical experience of selflessness need not alter one’s
character or make one who is not already moral moral. This strongly
suggests that the source of a moral sense does not lie in these experiences.
Rather, one becomes moral for reasons other than mystical experiences. The
moral mystics Stace cited are all instances of mystics who cultivated a
moral way of life on the path to the enlightened state or otherwise
developed in moral religious traditions. But mystical training also need not
be moral: the self-restraints of Theravada Buddhist cultivation result in no
harm to others, but the motive for following them is not other-regardingness
but only one’s own spiritual self-development (Jones 2004: 149–79). One
may not advance on any mystical path by acting selfishly at the expense of
others, but one may simply be indifferent to the suffering of others, as with
the Theravada monks who ignored the suffering of their fellow monks,
literally stepping over the sick to get to the Buddha until the Buddha made a
special rule against doing that. There may also be no desire to engage
others, positively or negatively.
      Stace conceded that not all mystics are moral but insisted that the
“ideal” and “complete” mystical experience—breaking down the barrier of
“I” and “you” into one whole—is necessarily moral (1960a: 340–41).
Perhaps we can dismiss mystical teachers who exploit or mistreat their
followers or otherwise act selfishly as being unenlightened (i.e., as not
having successfully overcome all sense of self), no matter what their
followers believe. Nevertheless, the fact remains that some major mystics,
such as Shankara, have adopted clearly nonmoral values and factual beliefs
that conflict with morality and that justify only indifference (Jones 2004:
94–114). If love is given in the depth-mystical experience, why did
Shankara not emphasize it? His nonmorality is especially telling since he
was at least indirectly influenced by the moral Mahayana Buddhism
through his line of teachers. Thus, while mystical experiences are
compatible with morality and may well be seen by some mystics as the
source of their moral concern, one still cannot argue that the experiences are
necessarily moral when the belief-claims and value-claims of some major
mystics do not justify a life of service to others. Obviously, Stace risks
arguing in a circle here—i.e., making morality a criterion for what counts as
the “highest” or “best” mystical experience, and then concluding that in its
essence, mysticism contains the love that is the ultimate motivation for all
good deeds (1960a: 340).
      G. William Barnard also argues that becoming loving and
compassionate is the normal result of a mystical experience, and that those
who are not moral have distorted the basic insight of love (Barnard &
Kripal 2002: 78–90). He argues that the enlightened typically do not feel
that they have license to murder babies, and thus that morality is the normal
product of mystical experiences. However, he does not differentiate the
“nonmoral” from the “immoral,” grouping them together under the heading
of “amoral.” This permits him to cite the general lack of antinomian
“anything goes” indulgence as evidence that the “true” mystical experience
is moral (since being moral then would be the only alternative to being
immoral). But even if mystics are only rarely immoral, the possibility of the
enlightened being simply indifferent to the suffering of others cannot be
ruled out. We cannot argue that just because one extreme is wrong
(“Immorality is the norm in mysticism”) that the other extreme must be
right (“Morality is the norm”), when there is a third possibility: aligning
one’s life with reality and being indifferent to the welfare of others.
Believing one is beyond the obligations of social regulations need not mean
that one must then be committing harmful, immoral, or antisocial acts. The
enlightened may not harm others for personal gain (since all sense of ego is
ended), but they may still be nonmoral and unconcerned with the suffering
of others. Mystics may also be as indifferent as the skeptic Pyrrho who,
when he saw his teacher fall into a swamp, simply walked by. The beliefs
and values advocated in Shankara’s writings are a prime instance of this
third possibility. It is difficult to argue that mystical experiences are
pregnant with moral action in light of that, and certainly Barnard cannot cite
the general lack of immoral excesses to rule out the third option.
Indifference is perfectly consistent with a sense of selflessness, and it is
hard to argue based on comparative mysticism (rather than from theological
convictions) that indifference must be an aberration or distortion, or that
any of the three options is the norm. Only if an overwhelming percentage of
mystics trained in a tradition that did not emphasize morality were in fact
moral could we argue that moral mysticism is the norm and nonmorality
and immorality are aberrations. (And today such research would be
compromised by an emphasis on morality in cultures generally.)
      In short, we cannot simply assume, as those raised in a Christian
culture might, that if all selfishness is removed, love will automatically
burst forth, as if that is the true human condition. If the depth-mystical
experience is free of all content, as at least some major mystics of all
traditions (including Christians such as Eckhart) assert, this mystical
experience must itself be neutral on the issue of morality since no value is
given. Such mystical experiences are not imbued with the moral sense and
thus cannot make an indifferent experiencer moral. Someone with no
inclination to be compassionate before the experience will not magically be
made compassionate.7 Thus, there is no reason to think that compassion is
the real base state of enlightenment based on these experiences, and no
reason to think that other reactions are distortions. The explanation of why
some mystics are moral, some nonmoral, and some immoral must lie
outside these experiences. If a Christian sets out on a long strenuous life of
training to become more loving, a depth-mystical experience will no doubt
be seen in those terms and make him or her more loving, but any change of
character will come from previous training, not the depth-mystical
experiences. So too, the fact that “love-mysticism” entered the Abrahamic
traditions after “knowledge-mysticism” is more likely the result of new
considerations and factors in the religious traditions, not the appearance of a
new type of mystical experience.
      Theistic mystical experiences may seem more promising since they
involve a felt sense of being loved. But whether theists can claim that these
experiences are inherently moral is open to doubt. (It would be odd to argue
that some theistic mystical experiences are distinctively “moral mystical
experiences” but others are not, since this would mean that God granted
specifically moral experiences to only some people and not to others.)
There are antinomian and libertine traditions in all the Abrahamic religions
that deny the authority of both civil laws and even the commands of God
and that espouse that the religion’s virtues are no longer needed. Among
Sufis, the love of God became so absolute that nothing else could be loved,
and divine commands had to be disobeyed as a distraction (Aminrazavi
1995: 20). And if the transcendent ground has one value, it has not always
been manifested in the world by Christians in ways we would deem moral.
Some great medieval Christian mystics, such as Bernard of Clairvaux,
supported activities of dubious morality, including the Inquisition and the
Crusades. Jan van Ruusbroec could advocate burning heretics at the stake
(1985: 143 n.18).
      Thus, the felt sense of being loved does not always translate into a
moral concern for others. Even feeling an overwhelming presence of an all-
encompassing love does not necessarily lead to an active life of loving
others—one could just as easily rest basking in the love, concluding that
this realm is not real, that there is nothing to fear in whatever happens, and
that since one’s own suffering is no longer important to oneself, then neither
is anyone else’s suffering important. This leads to a second general
problem: even if mystics did discover sympathy or any other sense of
concern for others through an experience of selflessness, the issue of
morality remains. Morality requires action, not merely other-regarding
emotions. Theravada Buddhist monks stop with a feeling of sympathy in
their meditative exercises—their experiences do not compel them to
perform actual compassionate actions helping others. Thus, one can have
sympathy resulting from experiences of selflessness without any resulting
action, and morality requires the latter. Compassion (karuna) in Mahayana
Buddhism and Christian love (agape), on the other hand, involve matters of
action, not merely emotions of sympathy or empathy.
      In sum, it is hard to argue, in light of the evidence from mystics around
the world, that love is necessarily given in mystical experiences or that
moral action is compelled and thus that these experiences justify morality.
Certainly it is only on theological grounds that orthodox Christianity can
claim to set the “true values” of all mysticism. And even in theistic
traditions there is no necessary connection of mystical experiences to a
moral concern for others. An implosion of the ground of reality does not
necessarily lead to an explosion of moral action. Religious values from
sources other than mystical experiences play a determining role in one’s
ethical commitments.