Mysticism and Empiricism
Moreover, if the different interpretations are all equally well grounded in
the same experiences and are equally reasonable (as discussed below), the
problem of competing interpretations rules out any simple empiricism in
mysticism. Mystical knowledge may be grounded in experience, but the
variety of understanding in the world’s mystical traditions shows that
mystical knowledge cannot be deduced in a simple fashion from
phenomenological descriptions of the experiences themselves. Experience
does not dictate a knowledge-claim about the nature of what is experienced
—even here knowledge-claims are always more than what can be justified
by the experience alone. For example, how could Advaitins know by any
experience that a transcendent consciousness is common to all persons and
all worldly phenomena? They would have to offer more than their inner
experiences to identify their self (atman) and the ground of reality
(brahman) or to argue that Brahman is conscious and it alone is real. There
is no agreed-on core of doctrines that is common to all or most mystical
traditions about what is experienced in either type of introvertive
experiences that is derivable from mystical experiences in a
straightforward, empiricist manner. And even if all “theory” of what is
experienced can be totally separated from the experience here (unlike with
sense-experiences), the problem still remains: the “over-beliefs” remain
essential to the understanding that the mystics themselves must have of
their own experiences to lead their ways of life in accord with how they see
reality. Thus, an element that goes beyond what the experiences warrant
remains an irremovable part of mysticism.
      Nevertheless, mysticism is often portrayed as a form of empiricism.
Robert Nozick says that Aurobindo “is a mystic empiricist in that he builds
on his mystic experiences, offering us descriptions of them, hypotheses that
stick rather closely to them, and also bold speculations which reach far
beyond the experiences themselves in order to place them in a coherent
world picture” (in Phillips 1986: viii). “Empiricist” and “bold speculations”
are not words normally found in the same sentence. The core claim of
empiricism is that we do not have any knowledge beyond what is justified
by experience alone—empiricists do not accept any alleged knowledge-
claims that go beyond experience, let alone speculation. Buddhism too is
often seen as a form of “radical empiricism.” B. Alan Wallace talks of a
“return to empiricism” (2006: 37). He decries “mystical theology” and any
“leap of faith that violates reason” (ibid.: 36). But he has no problem
utilizing the Yogachara Buddhist concept of the alaya-vijnana—an alleged
substrate “storehouse-consciousness” that precedes life and continues
beyond death in which karmic seeds take root and develop; it is the ultimate
ground state of consciousness, existing prior to all conceptual dichotomies,
including subject/object and mind/matter (ibid.: 33–36). However, it is hard
to see how we could know by any experience that this substrate existed
prior to life and consciousness. How could any experiences prove that there
is a reality that existed prior to the dichotomy of “mind” and “matter,” or
that consciousness has no beginning but has existed since the beginning of
the universe, or that consciousness will never end? Thus, the “storehouse
consciousness” appears to be a bit of Buddhist theorizing: it is an attempt to
answer the problem of how present actions can have karmic effects in future
rebirths when everything under Buddhist metaphysics is momentary.
Moreover, most Buddhists reject such a posit. In other Buddhist schools,
there is no permanent continuum underlying the changing configurations of
the parts constituting a person that can be found in any of our experiences.
Nor does an individual’s constantly changing consciousness arise from a
permanent reality. For example, the Vaibhashikas believe, in Wallace’s
words, that only “brief, irreducible moments of consciousness are the
absolute level of the mind” (2008: 121). In sum, positing a substrate
consciousness is not the simple result of empiricism connected to
meditative or other experiences, but is speculation. An empiricist would
instead remain agnostic about claims beyond our experience.
      That classical mystics justify their claims by appeal to their tradition’s
authorities and doctrines and not their own experiences also conflicts with
empiricism. Even Buddhist schools over time came to accept the Buddha’s
testimony (shabda) as a means of valid knowledge, along with perception
and inference.6 If mystics have to check their beliefs against the Vedas, the
Bible, the Quran, or another revealed source to be sure what their
experiences “confirm” and indeed that their experiences are veridical, then
they are not empiricists, and ultimately they are in no better position than
the rest of us for determining the actual nature of what was experienced
since mystical experiences cannot tell us which authority we should accept
as revealed, if any. The decision to accept something as a revelation
typically comes prior to mystical enlightenment, and it is hard to see
mystical experiences verifying the choice when mystics in different
traditions make the same claim for their own scripture. That a mystic had
prior beliefs when a mystical experience occurred does not absolutely rule
out that experience as being cognitive or what the mystic claims it was, any
more than the fact that scientists have prior beliefs invalidates their
observations or rules out their theories as scientific knowledge. But it
dictates caution in accepting the mystic’s claims. So too, that mystics appeal
to scripture does not mean that mystical experiences are not cognitive, but it
does mean that more factors are involved in determining what the insight
actually is than the experiences alone.
      “Empiricism” means more than simply “experientially based,” and
knowledge-claims in mysticism are always more than what can be justified
by the experience alone, as empiricism requires. Because there are equally
well grounded competing mystical doctrines, there also cannot be any
simple correspondence theory of truth between highly ramified claims and
experiential facts. Nor can there be any foundation of solid, indisputable
beliefs based on self-evident or indubitable premises concerning mystical
experiences: the sense that one has experienced a transcendent reality may
be incorrigible, but no “thick” description of what is experienced appears
impervious to error. Nor do mystics offer tentative speculative hypotheses
based on their experiences—they experience God, Brahman, or whatever.
Even if the depth-mystical experience is a direct experience of a noumenal
reality unmediated by any structuring, each mystic takes the same
experiences as confirming his or her tradition’s doctrines (even if mystics
must reinterpret those doctrines in light of the their experiences). But if this
and other introvertive experiences are open to numerous competing
understandings, they obviously are not self-interpreting or self-validating,
even if mystics typically think their own experiences are.