The Compatibility Problem
The last point is the most significant problem for scientific reductions and
should be elaborated: whether natural and transcendent explanations of
mystical experiences are in fact compatible. Naturalists argue that if
scientists can identify a set of conditions causing a mystical experience to
arise in a significant percentage of participants, then the experience is
totally natural and a transcendent reality cannot be a causal factor in the
chain of events producing the experience. One response is simply to deny
that any complete natural explanation is possible in practice (Alston 1991:
230)—the complexity of any human phenomenon renders it impossible for
scientists to be certain that they have identified all the necessary conditions
for any experience (Wainwright 1981: 73–76). While this strategy definitely
raises a very real problem with these explanations, the approach here will
be to assume that some complete and detailed natural explanations for
mystical experience will someday occur, even if each type requires a
different natural explanation.
      The question then is: does a scientific explanation of these states
undercut their cognitive claims? Consider mindfulness. Arthur Deikman
plausibly explains mindfulness in terms of the “deautomatization” of the
habitual mental structures that organize, limit, select, and interpret
perceptual stimuli leading to an expanded awareness of new dimensions of
the total stimulus array (1980). Thus, deautomatization removes precisely
the conceptual elements that constructivists argue are the total cognitive
substance of mystical experiences. In the mindfulness mode (unlike in the
normal “manipulative” mode), one is more receptive to sensory input and
responds more immediately. Deikman uses this mechanism to explain
features associated with mystical experiences: the sense of ultimate
realness, unity, ineffability, the heightened sensitivity of sense-experience,
and so on. All are simply the result of the mind being unconstrained by the
usual structuring. If so, the sense of selflessness in the mindful state is no
more grounds to reject belief in a self than the fact that mystics are unaware
of time in their experiences means that time is not real. Deikman thinks the
available scientific evidence tends to support the view that all mystical
experiences are only a subjective “internal perception” (ibid.: 259). James
Austin offers a similar theory about the circuits of the brain associated with
self-awareness and those associated with monitoring the environment being
deactivated during meditation (1998), leading to a sense of a selfless
connection to the world. But do these theories by themselves rule out the
possibility of cognition of the unreality of a self and of our connection to
everything else in the universe? Perhaps deautomatization permits an
extrovertive insight to occur into the nature of the mind by its decentered
perspective (Bishop et al. 2004: 234). Based on the science of the brain
alone, can we conclude that mindful awareness cannot be cognitive?
Without more evidence, can we definitely rule out that mindfulness mystics
are not seeing that there is in fact no real everyday ego?
      It is not clear how the science itself could possibly answer such
questions: whether the experiences are cognitive or not, the scientific
findings would be the same. In the end, mindfulness is a process of inner
observation, not “self-knowledge” (Bishop et al. 2004: 235), and any ontic
claims are a matter of reflection. Thus, it appears that these questions
remain matters of philosophy, not science. The issue then is this: what do
any scientific explanations actually accomplish? If we assume that scientists
can duplicate every feature of an introvertive mystical experience by natural
causes so that a stimulated experience is phenomenologically
indistinguishable from “real” mystical experiences, does the naturalists’
conclusion follow? No. Advocates of a transcendent realism can still
respond that at best all scientists have done is to locate the
neurophysiological bases that, when stimulated, permit a genuine infusion
of a transcendent reality. If genuine experiences of a transcendent reality do
occur, then obviously some mechanism in us permits them to occur—all
that scientists may have done is demonstrated how to stimulate those
mechanisms by means other than the involvement of a transcendent reality,
thereby permitting a transcendent reality to appear. The science cannot in
itself rule out the possibility that other causes—transcendent ones—may
also produce the same physiological effects or otherwise invalidate a
mystical claim to a genuine insight. Only the metaphysics of naturalists
requires that conclusion.
      This issue involves two points. First, if, for example, during some
mystical experiences our brain produces a certain chemical, scientists may
well be able to identify this chemical and to manufacture a drug that will
substitute for its natural production in the brain during a mystical
experience; this drug can then produce the same neural effects when it is
artificially introduced into the brain. But scientists cannot conclude that
during mystical experiences occurring outside the lab, a transcendent reality
is not involved in the production of the same chemical. For example, in an
introvertive theistic experience, God may somehow use the normal
neurochemical channels of our brain to produce a mystical experience. The
artificially administered drug can then produce the same effects in the brain,
thereby permitting the possibility of a genuine mystical experience. If the
experience of transcendent realities is veridical, the awareness involves
natural processes occurring in our body, and all that scientists will have
done is locate the parts of our brain that are involved and identify the
chemical conditions necessary for a genuine experience of a transcendent
reality to occur. Such findings would mean only that some chemical
conditions are necessary to set up a genuine experience of a transcendent
reality, not that no insight could be involved.
      In short, how do we know that the chemical reaction of the drugs in the
brain does not simply reproduce the same chemical reactions that mystics
have when they are aware of a transcendent reality? Naturalists cannot
conclude from the science alone that science has demonstrated that there are
no other ways to activate the same exact conditions. Ingesting the drugs
may be a final sufficient cause when all the necessary conditions for the
experience are in place, but how could the science itself show that other
sufficient causes are not possible? Only if the scientific explanations by
themselves could in principle rule out the very possibility of a transcendent
reality being a factor in a mystical experience could such explanations
definitely be grounds for a naturalists’ reduction of those experiences, and
there does not appear to be any way that any scientific explanation could
accomplish this. In sum, the science alone cannot, even in principle, refute
the mystical claim to cognitivity.
      Thus, scientists will at best only reveal some necessary natural
conditions and one set of possible causes for the mystical experience to
occur. It still is simply the naturalists’ assumption that these conditions are
the only possible sufficient causes. All that the scientists have demonstrated
at best is something comparable to an electrical stimulation of the arm
causing it to jerk: scientists have located the mechanisms at work in the
event and have stimulated them; they have not proved that no other cause of
the event is possible (the mind moving the arm). Naturalists can push the
button stimulating the arm movement all they want, but they cannot
eliminate the possibility that there may be other ways nature causes that
same movement. In short, scientists can never demonstrate scientifically
that they have located the only possible causes. So too with mystical
experiences: the naturalists’ metaphysics requires them to conclude that
something transcendent cannot be a cause, but nothing in the actual science
requires this philosophical judgment.
      This leads to the second basic point: stimulating certain parts of the
brain may be necessary, but this does not mean that natural events are all
that is involved. Perhaps by their actions on the brain the drugs merely set
the stage to permit something transcendent to enter the subject’s
consciousness. That is, a stimulation prepares the brain, but something more
is still needed for a mystical experience to occur. (Also remember that at
present mystical experiences do not occur every time an artificial
stimulation is applied. This strongly suggests that more than the physical
base is involved in these experiences.) Without more argument, naturalists
cannot conclude from the fact that some chemicals set up the physiological
conditions that the resulting experience must be a purely natural
phenomenon and no nonnatural factors are involved. Scientists cannot
determine that what they find is all there is to an experience, and so they
can never demonstrate that they have eliminated a transcendent reality as a
possible element. The event generated by the drug, whether administered
artificially or generated by the brain, thus may permit true insights into a
transcendent reality, or the experience with or without artificial stimulation
may in fact only be the source of a delusion—the biochemical bases alone
will not determine this. In short, science can never prove that these
experiences are only purely natural phenomena.
      Science also cannot determine the cognitive status of mystical
experiences even if no nonnatural elements are involved: nature-mystical
experiences, mindfulness, and even introvertive mystical experiences may
not require the intervention of a transcendent reality into the natural order
and yet still be cognitive. Extrovertive mystical experiences involve a new
sense of the nature of the phenomenal world. If a transcendent reality
grounds the reality of the experiencer, the experience of it is not a matter of
any sort of signal or energy being injected from a transcendent realm into
the natural realm or any sort of interaction with an outside source, any more
than with sense-experience. Instead, experiencers can become aware of the
reality already immanent in them through the relevant parts of the brain in
another manner. The same would hold for a theistic god that is the sustainer
of the natural universe. The depth-mystical experience involves emptying
the mind of all differentiated content and letting the transcendent ground
implode in it (whether it is the ground of the self or of all phenomenal
reality). No contact with a separate reality or action by a transcendent
reality is involved—the experience leads simply to realizing what has
always been the case. Before, during, and after the mystical experience the
experiencer has the same ontic relation to the transcendent reality. Even if
the brain is only a natural product that evolved to help in our survival, there
still may be a configuration of the brain’s parts that also enables us to
become aware of a transcendent reality. Indeed, for all we currently know of
the brain there may be a dedicated circuit in the brain—a “God receptor”—
that has evolved solely for the purpose of enabling mystical experiences.
Either way, both the mystical experiences and subsequent states obviously
will be as open in principle to as complete a scientific account as
nonmystical experiences and states. And any identification of the bodily
correlates that form the base for these experiences will not necessitate the
conclusion that no insight into the nature of reality is involved.
      In sum, the scientific explanations per se are perfectly compatible with
theistic and other mystical explanations. Perhaps all that scientists may be
doing is identifying the locus where a transcendent reality becomes
involved with the brain and then artificially stimulating the neurological
mechanisms permitting a mystical experience on some occasions. Such an
identification cannot by itself rule out this possibility. Nor can it rule out the
possibility that something transcendent is involved even in artificially
stimulated experiences that result in cognitive insights. Thus, even a
complete scientific account of any mystical experience will not determine
whether mystical experiences might provide insights into the nature of
reality. That issue will still have to be decided on philosophical grounds.