The Analogy to Sense-Perception
Another popular argument for the veridicality of mystical experiences is
based on an analogy to sense-perception. This is a reasonable approach,
since sense-experience is considered the paradigm of epistemic reliability in
our culture, principally because of intersubjective checkability. In addition,
mystics do utilize sensory terminology—“seeing,” “feeling,” “touching,”
“grasping,” “embracing,” “penetrating” a reality. Some philosophers
attempt to show that it is just as reasonable to accept mystical claims as it is
to accept claims based on sense-perceptions. That is, if we accept sense-
experiences as reliable, then we should also equally accept mystical
experiences as reliable (see Wainwright 1981: chap. 3; Swinburne 1991;
Yandell 1993; Gellman 1997, 2001).
     William Alston stresses this analogy, calling the direct, noninferential
mystical experiences of God “mystical perceptions” (1991).8 However, he
does not focus on the experiences themselves but on the belief-forming and
evaluating practices connected to them—“doxastic practices.” (That
mystics traditionally appeal to their tradition’s authorities and not to their
own experiences is relevant here: mystics themselves judge their own
experiences to be veridical by a social practice.) Alston’s position is that if a
mystical doxastic practice as a whole can be shown to be epistemically
similar to the practice of forming beliefs on the basis of sense-perceptions
or memories, then it is just as rational to accept the former as it is to accept
the latter. There is no noncircular way to justify the latter as a whole, since
we must rely on other sense-perceptions or memories to confirm or
disconfirm any claims based on them. Indeed, no doxastic practice can be
justified by outside standards—there is no way to justify all of one’s
justifiers. We must accept the general reliability of sensing and memory,
and he argues that the same holds for some mystical practices. He
concentrates on Christianity and argues that Christian mystical practices
give Christian mystical beliefs the same epistemic status as beliefs formed
from sense-experiences and have nothing to disqualify their rational
acceptance. In sum, the Christian mystical practice is rationally engaged in
because it is a socially established belief-forming practice that is not
demonstrably unreliable or otherwise disqualified for rational acceptance
(ibid.: 194). For Alston, both sense-experience and mystical experience
involve a direct realism, i.e., the perceptions involve access to and a direct
awareness of, its objects, although both, following Kant, are “shot through
with ‘interpretation’ ” (ibid.: 27). In both cases, there is also no independent
way of establishing the purported objects of the experience. Alston accepts
both types of experience as reliable, but he admits that the mystical belief-
forming practice does not have the same degree of reliability as sense-
perception’s since there is nothing comparable in mystical practices to
third-person checking of beliefs based on sense-perception (ibid.: 211–13,
238).
      For the analogy to proceed, mystical experiences must be relevantly
similar to sense-experiences. In practice, this has meant that philosophers
have treated transcendent realities as ordinary intentional objects and
mystical experiences as having a subject/object structure—positions that
mystics reject. Mystical claims’ lack of public checkability also remains too
significant for many philosophers to accept the analogy (see Gale 2005:
428–33 for standard objections). As noted, transcendent objects are not
phenomenal objects that can be identified empirically, and thus claims
about them are not checkable empirically.9 Moreover, sense-perception is
universal and unavoidable—we cannot help but have the world impinge on
us and must rely on sense-experience to survive. Mystical experiences, even
if more common than usually supposed, are rare in comparison. Indeed,
even for those who have had more than one mystical experience, they are
rare compared to a lifetime of ordinary sense-experiences. This does not
mean that mystical experiences cannot be veridical, but it does put them in
a separate class from sense-experiences. Alston, however, dismisses any
disanalogies to sense-experience—in particular, the lack of third-person
checking—as an “epistemic imperialism” of importing standards from one
doxastic practice into another (1991: 216). This makes Alston’s argument
very frustrating: it leads quickly to the claim that mystical experiences must
be as reliable as sense-experiences because any differences, no matter how
substantive, can be dismissed as inapplicable. Thereby, mystical
experiences of course end up being analogous to sense-experience since
anything dissimilar is dismissed.
     Another problem is that the world appears “religiously ambiguous,” as
John Hick put it (1989:226), both between natural and religious
explanations and among competing religious explanations, but it is not
“physically ambiguous” when it comes to sense-experiences. There simply
are more fundamental metaphysical choices in the interpretation of mystical
experiences than for sense-experiences—mystical beliefs are more diverse
and even incompatible on the very nature of what is experienced in a way
that beliefs about the external world are not. Cultural beliefs may well
shape our sense-experiences and produce diverse catalogs of the objects
populating the world, but beliefs lead to variations in the understanding of
the mystical experiential input in a way that they do not in sense-
experience: identifying the theistic experience as, say, of a trinitarian god is
not given in the experience itself in any straightforward way but depends on
applying a large body of theological background beliefs. Interpretations of
the reality involved in introvertive mystical experiences reflect a difference
about the fundamental ontic nature of what is experienced, not merely a
difference in classification as with sense-objects.
     So too, we must trust the general reliability of sense-experience and
memory in a way that we do not have to with mystical experiences. There is
no alternative explanation for the sensory claims, as Alston admits (1991:
275), but not only is there a significant conflict of religious interpretations
of the mystical experiences, the alternative of plausible naturalistic
reductions of mystical experiences that reject them as cognitive must be
taken into consideration. Overall, mystical experiences play a smaller role
in the final determination of knowledge-claims than in the case of sense-
experiences: mystical experiences cannot be reproduced in a third-person
manner for checking mystical claims; because of this lack of testability,
mystics are not as greatly constrained by their experiences in the theories
they hold as in science. And if mystical claims in the end genuinely
conflict, then, as noted above, most mystics are wrong, and thus mystical
experiences, unlike sense-perception, are an unreliable basis for belief-
formation. That is, it is not merely internal inconsistency within a way of
life that would render a practice unreliable—the conflict between
irreconcilable claims from different traditions in effect cancels the
reliability of each claim produced within a mystical practice. This means
that the conflict provides good reason to withhold assent to any doctrines of
any tradition—and this applies to the mystics themselves: they should
withhold assent to the doctrines of their own tradition. Their doctrines are
as unreliable as the doctrines of other traditions even if some doctrines
happen to be correct.
      On the other side, those who think that the depth-mystical experience
is unique epistemically as well as physiologically also reject the analogy to
sense-perceptions as fundamentally misleading. The fundamental problem
is that mystical experiences involve a knowledge by “participation” or
“identity,” not anything like a “nonsensory sense-perception” since it has no
object-like content to perceive. It is the exact opposite of being “confronted
with an object or reality that appears to or is present to [mystics] in a
nonsensory way” (contra Gellman 2001: 11). Nothing is presented like an
object distinct from the mind, and to think of mystics as actually
“perceiving God” is to get off on the wrong foot since it establishes a
duality of experiencer and what is experienced that mystics deny. The states
of consciousness permitting participatory knowledge make that knowledge
unique. Transcendent realities allegedly are present in a way any
phenomenon of the world is not. Perception requires some kind of
intentional image, and even if introvertive mystics use the language of
imagery, introvertive experiences do not involve any. Mystics use sensory
terms taken from the everyday world, but this does not mean that any
introvertive mystical experience is in any substantive way like an
intentional sense-experience or that introvertive mystical insights are
formed in a parallel way to sensory claims. Sensory terminology is the only
one readily available for distinguishing a cognitive experience from
“feeling” in an emotional sense or from imagination. Even advocates of the
analogy to sense-experience admit that the analogy is only very loose (see
Gale 2005: 432–33), and Alston in the end concedes that the analogy
amounts to no more than that sense-experiences and mystical experiences
are both “socially embedded.”