Mystics can be very confusing when it comes to language: they can write
copiously and impressively on the subject of what they have experienced
and then immediately turn around and claim that nothing can be said on that
topic. How can the Daoist Laozi say “those who know do not speak, and
those who speak do not know” while introducing the Daodejing, a book on
the Way? To Plotinus, nothing can characterize the One, including calling it
“one” (Enneads 5.3.13–14, 6.9.5). To Meister Eckhart, God is nameless,
and to give him a name (as he appears to have just done) would make God
part of thought and thus be an “image” (2009: 139). How can he say “God
is above all names” (ibid.: 139, 153) when he identified the reality by
name? Some reality is dubbed “God.” Shankara can claim that Brahman is
unspeakable (avachya) and inexpressible (anirukta) while creating a
metaphysical system about Brahman (Taittiriya-upanishad-bhashya 2.7.1).
For him, even the words “atman” and “Brahman” are only superimpositions
on what is real (Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-bhashya 2.3.6). Even
“Brahman without attributes” (nirguna-brahman) is a concept devised in
contrast with “Brahman with attributes” (saguna-brahman), and so even
that concept must be denied as inapplicable to what is real—what is real is
beyond both of these concepts, as are Advaita’s standard characterizations
of Brahman as reality (sat), an inactive consciousness (chitta), and bliss
(ananda) (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.2.22; Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-
bhashya 2.3.1). For Shankara, the whole phenomenal realm of the root-
ignorance (avidya) arises entirely from speech (Brahma-sutra-bhasya
2.1.27).
     Why do mystics have trouble here that most people do not when they
experience something phenomenal? Why is what is experienced considered
inexpressible and even unnameable? It will be argued here that the tension
arises for two basic reasons. First, conceptualizations must be advanced for
even mystics themselves to understand what is experienced, but all
conceptualizations are inherently dualistic (since they distinguish one thing
from others), and so they all must also be jettisoned from the mind for a
mystical experience to occur. In short, all conceptions must be both
advanced and abandoned. Second, both the experiences themselves and
what is experienced in these experiences seem “wholly other” than any
worldly phenomena, and so any language applicable to worldly phenomena
is deemed inapplicable to what is experienced. The states of consciousness
in which the experiences occur are different from the mindful and ordinary
states of consciousness in which mystics can depict what is experienced.