Accepting Mysticism Today
Many have noted the lack of spirituality in mainstream religion in the West
today, the erosion of liberal religiosity, and the spiritual malaise of many
today. Without some injection of personal spiritual experience—for theists,
some encounter with a living god—religion becomes no more than a social
club with a bloodless metaphysics (and probably suffocatingly dogmatic, if
doctrines are taken seriously). Can religion survive if it does not generate
any spiritual experiences of alleged transcendent realities? Some argue that
a reinvigorated mysticism may be the cure. Robert Ellwood suggests that it
is hard to conceive of religion persisting without continual mystical
experiences on the part of some, because mysticism is the only guarantor of
any future for religion since it points to the one undeniable empirical fact in
religion: that now as much as ever people report having experiences of
ultimacy (1999: 190). The Catholic theologian Karl Rahner predicted that
the “Christian of the future will be a mystic or he or she will not exist at all”
(1981: 149–50).4 In Asia, many, including Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan in the
middle of the twentieth century, have argued that the future of religion in
general or even of civilization itself depends on a strong continuing
presence of at least some mystics.
      But can mysticism in fact help? The first point toward answering that
question is that today the natural universe is too ingrained in the mind of
anyone influenced by modern science to doubt seriously that it is fully and
fundamentally real. Scientists have revealed a complex and intricate
universe of extraordinary size, with billions of galaxies, billions of years
old, and an earth with a fascinating history and diversity of life. The
majesty and splendor of it all cannot be ignored. The fact that the universe
existed for billions of years without any conscious life is enough to dispute
any mystical claim that the universe is just a staging ground for human
beings to return to our true state in another realm, unless one wants to
accept a wasteful creator of truly cosmic proportions, or that the universe is
the result of sentient beings’ mysterious “root-ignorance.” The phenomenal
world is irreducibly real in the sense that it is now a fact that we cannot get
around. In light of evolution, it is also hard to maintain that each of us is a
special creation of God, or that human beings as a species are the goal of
the universe. And the amount of natural suffering only becomes more
mysterious in light of any mystical experiences of bliss associated with a
theistic source. In sum, once we have passed through the education
provided by science, it is very hard to treat the unfolding world of time as
no more than the “dream” realm of some other reality. Indeed, many
scholars argue that we are so secularized that we are no longer capable of
experiencing the world in the way that premoderns did as the creation of
another reality.
      In addition, there is a metaphysical issue: if there is a transcendent
source, we still have to explain why the natural world exists. The spectrum
of colors is as real as its source of white light and must be accounted for. If
introvertive mystical experiences give the sense that the transcendent realm
is all that is important, why does the natural realm exist at all? Why is there
now more than merely the transcendent state? Why did the source emanate
out a diverse realm (or whatever is the relation of the source to this world)
and not remain alone real? And why are we here and not there? We like to
think that there must be some reason and that the world did not occur
simply by dumb luck or without a purpose.5 It is hard to accept that this
world is a meaningless “play” of a transcendent reality. Any system such as
Advaita Vedanta that does not explain all the incredible variety of the
diverse phenomena of our old and extensive universe but dismisses it all as
a dream is thus difficult to accept today. It would dissolve all the
phenomena that form the basis of any meaning or content to our lives as an
illusion. Indeed, Advaita has trouble explaining how there could even be the
illusion of a phenomenal realm. The unchanging luminous consciousness
also somehow presents the discursive mind, and thus the discursive mind is
part of what is real and not in any way an illusion. The waves on the ocean
are as real as the still ocean depths. We may not be simply our changing
thoughts and feelings, and thus it may be an error to identify ourselves with
those or to reduce consciousness to those, but such mental content is also
real, and thus it is just as much an error to claim that we are not our
thoughts and feelings, but only an unchanging observing consciousness. It
may be simpler, easier to bear suffering, and more freeing to identify only
with the silent observer, but that does not reflect all that we are.
      So too, if there is a reason for all this, it would have to be more than
putting us through trials and eventually simply returning us to our prior
“true state.” That is, something must be wrong with this picture if the only
goal of this world is to get out of it and return to the same condition we
were in before. Why create something if the end result is merely the same
as the beginning? In light of science’s findings, we cannot accept that we
are aliens in this world—“strangers and exiles on the earth” (Hebrews
11:13). There may be more that is real about us, but this universe must be
taken to be our natural home, and thus we must take it seriously. Moreover,
there is no reason to think that the objective of life here is to sit blissed out
all the time, as the caricature of mystics goes, even if that were possible. It
is difficult to see even having introvertive mystical experiences—i.e.,
glimpses of transcendent realities—in the world as the ultimate goal of life.
Thus, if mysticism is to be taken seriously today, mystics must provide an
interpretation that gives full significance to this realm and advances a
meaningful way of life in accord with it. Any revamped mysticism must
accept as a basic premise that this realm is profoundly significant, and it
must proffer a reason for why it is here. To that extent, any mysticism must
be “this-worldly” and not exclusively “other-worldly.”
      All of this means that no matter how powerful introvertive mystical
experiences are, they must be interpreted to give full reality to the world—
this world is now irrevocably embedded in our view of what is fully real.
Today our starting point for understanding what we are is that we are all the
refuse of an ancient supernova—we may be more than that, but we cannot
start by thinking we are really a disembodied mind or the special creation of
a god.6 Mystics today must accept that we are a natural part of this world,
and any mysticism must explain why this is so and also why we have an
analytical mind that seems to alienate us from the rest of reality. Suffering
cannot be dismissed as an illusion but must be accepted as fully real and in
need of an explanation. And if they are to be anything like classical mystics,
mystics today must also defend the existence of a transcendent ground to
this real world. That is, the problem for anything resembling a classical
mystical way of life today is how to reinject the world into a nonnaturalistic
framework with transcendent realities without denying the world’s full
reality—one that incorporates both an eternal ontic vertical dimension and a
historical horizontal dimension as both real and important. But if
successful, mysticism can replace the image of a totally transcendent deity
with one that is also immanent in space and time, since the god of theistic
mysticism is experienceable and the ground of the natural world.
      However, living a life that incorporates awareness of the still ontic
depth while functioning in the constantly changing surface-world is not
simple (see Jones 2004: 379–405, 2010: 261–76): how can one rest
inwardly in the source of being with a still mind and emotional calm while
yet remaining outwardly active in the realm of diversity? How do we quiet
the inner noise in our mind to let the ground shine through and still have a
fully functioning, concept-guided mind? How can one integrate what
Meister Eckhart calls the soul’s two eyes—the inward one that focuses on
being and the outward one that focuses on creatures (2009: 570–71; also see
Mundaka Up. 3.1.1)? That is, how can one integrate a background
awareness of beingness into the foreground of active involvement with the
world? How can we not end up with a divided consciousness—one that is
either aware of the ontic depth or the diversified phenomenal surface, but
not both at the same time? How do we overcome a dualism of one self who
acts and another transcendental self who only witnesses events and does not
participate? Even if a mystical liberation in this life (jivan-mukti) is possible
despite our ties to the body and with a mind having multiple functions,
disdain for the world would not reflect life in this world. An ascetic
renunciation of the world is clearly misguided if we accept that this world
as fully real. If we focus exclusively on the present moment without a
thought to the future or on the depth of being without regard to the surface
waves, we will not last long. Through meditation we may be able to
eliminate many negative states of mind and replace them with states
permitting calmness and compassion, leading to more focus and a more
productive life. (Some initial studies of meditation programs for elementary
school and high school students indicate that meditation helps with
behavioral problems and even math scores.) We may also integrate more
awareness of the vertical dimension into our lives and become less self-
centered. We cannot, however, have a life of true selflessness, because one’s
life in the world is still real and requires some self-assertiveness—the
Daodejing emphasizes nonassertiveness, but assertive yang-actions must be
part of the balance along with such yin-actions. So too, complete self-
denying love for others does not reflect reality as it truly is, since we are
also equally part of the world—we are as real and important as the other
beings we want to help. Indeed, from a mystical point of view, the total
renunciation or denial of oneself and the world involves making distinctions
and is an attachment since we and the world are real. In addition, quashing
all personal emotions such as hate and greed may help us see something of
reality that we missed, but we can still ask if such even-mindedness reflects
all that is real. Being emotionally detached from all people, including one’s
family and friends, also may not reflect life as it has actually evolved.
      Thus, even if the idea of a distinct, self-contained “ego” is a socially
constructed fiction, we must have a place for our particular node among the
different nodes in the web of phenomenal reality: a “person” may not be a
permanent, separate entity, but the impermanent stream of conditions
constructing a node is a real part of what in the final analysis is real. What
happens to our body and mind in the world matters, even if our
transcendent beingness remains unaffected by the vicissitudes of the world.
Much of our suffering may arise from identifying with surface thoughts and
emotions and forgetting our ontic depth, but those surface phenomena are
still part of what we are. (Indeed, if the depth-experience is the experience
of one’s true self and not merely of pure beingness, then an issue arises:
what is experienced is changeless, and if one’s self is changeless, then it
does not have any of the features that make a person a person—emotions,
sense-experience, and indeed even consciousness change.) So too, the other
conscious nodes that are worthy of moral concern cannot be dismissed as
illusions in a dream. Thus, treating this world as an illusion or “play” of the
gods not only gives us no reason to treat the world itself seriously, but
removes other people as realities to treat morally.
      And it is important to note again that mysticism is not necessarily in
conflict with science. To classical mystics, the metaphysics of naturalism
would have to be abandoned, and some transcendent dimension to both the
natural world and a human being that is open to experience would have to
be accepted. But science is not the philosophy of naturalism, and thus
giving up naturalism is not giving up science (see Jones 2010: 191–202). As
discussed in chapter 8, mystical experiences involve calming the mind of its
normal differentiated jumble and discerning one dimension of reality—the
beingness of the natural world or its source—while scientists discover the
causal realities within the natural world and how they work. Thus, it is not a
matter of mysticism replacing science, but supplementing it with a different
type of knowledge. We can interpret mystical experiences as a cognitive
insight into the depth beingness of reality and still affirm the full reality of
the phenomena of the natural world and the value of instrumental states of
consciousness. Thus, there would be a role for different states of
consciousness enabling different ways of knowing. Mystical matters would
be limited to the issue of beingness, and even depth-mystical experiences
would not be taken as overwhelming all other types of cognitive
experiences. If we accept this approach, we need not deny science as
cognitive to accept mysticism as cognitive, or vice versa. So too, a scientific
explanation of the biological bases of mystical experiences could still be
affirmed. Mystical doctrines of transcendent realities would not need to be
revised in light of any scientific findings or theories—again, consciousness
may present a problem—but other doctrines of mystical ways of life may
have to be revised to incorporate scientific insights.
      Thus, it is possible to forge a conciliation of mysticism and science
that accepts both endeavors as knowledge-giving (see also Jones 2010:
261–76). This means that it is not necessary to naturalize introvertive
mystical experiences for a reconciliation: one can accept the classical
mystical position that these experiences involve transcendent realities while
still fully affirming science. However, this position does reflect a
nonmystical point of view, since it gives equal weight to a nonmystical
approach to the world, and it would lead to what from a classical mystical
point of view is a truncated mysticism. But such a conciliation removes one
objection to the cognitive validity of introvertive mystical experiences by
showing that their claims to be an awareness of a transcendent reality are
consistent with science’s cognitive claims. Thus, we are not forced to
choose between “the path of spirituality” and “the path of reason,” as the
biologist Edward O. Wilson and many other naturalists believe, at least
when it comes to the core of mystical knowledge-claims. Whether theism
can reconcile a transcendent god that is active in the phenomenal world
with a “path of reason” is another question.
     But whether any accommodation of science and mysticism is
successful or not will ultimately depend on basic philosophical judgments
that transcend both endeavors. One must also ask whether a mystically
informed life must be bifurcated: we can focus on beingness or the
differentiations of the phenomenal world but not both at the same time. We
may be calmer and more focused with mystical training, but the
conceptualizing analytical mind and concept-driven perceptions are needed
to conduct science and to live in the world. We cannot live focused only on
the present moment even if doing so lets us see the beingness of things.