Science, Mysticism, and the Natural World
Science and extrovertive mysticism share an attention to the natural realm,
albeit different aspects of it. But it is important to realize that even the
depth-mystical Advaitins do not consider the realm of “illusion” (maya) to
be unreal in the way of a delusion involving something that is not there is
(asat)—to use the Indian analogy, imagining a rabbit’s horns. Rather, the
illusion involves misreading what is really there: we are misled by
appearances to focus on the temporary configurations of things, and thus we
end up being confused about what is real—we mistakenly think of the
phenomenal world as existing separate from brahman/atman and as
consisting of ontologically distinct parts. In the Upanishadic analogy of the
clay pot, the preexisting clay is real and the pot (i.e., the temporary form the
clay is in) is not. This conveys the sense of what is real and what is
“illusory” in both introvertive and extrovertive mysticism generally: the
temporary, dependent, and impermanent configurations are dismissed as
ultimately unreal and only “illusions,” but the reality of the underlying
beingness is affirmed. No classical mystical tradition dismisses the world as
“unreal” in any stronger sense: the beingness manifested in the everyday
world remains real.
      Moreover, mystics need not deny that the world has stable structures
that are open to scientific study. Even in Advaita, the realm of illusion is
stable and lawful (e.g., the law of karma governing unenlightened actions),
and it remains so even for the enlightened. Shankara granted sense-
experience and reasoning complete freedom within their proper sphere: the
“dream” realm of the natural world (Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-bhashya
2.1.20; Bhagavad-gita-bhashya 18.66). And there is no reason that any
other mystics should not do the same, unless metaphysical and theological
considerations dictate otherwise. Mystics need not repudiate anything
scientists say about the nature of structures (with the possible exception of
theories of the nature of consciousness). Enlightened mystics experience the
world by focusing on its beingness rather than the what-ness and how-ness
of things, but this does not mean that structures do not exist, any more than
focusing on the color of things means that things do not have mass. What is
experienced seems timeless during the experience, but how long the
experience occurred can nevertheless still be measured, and the same
applies more generally to the other features of nature absent in either
introvertive or extrovertive mystical experiences.13 In sum, nothing of
reality’s underlying structures is necessarily negated by these experiences
alone.
      Unless metaphysical judgments such as Advaita’s prevail, mystics can
treat being and structures as two separate but equally real aspects of the
world. The distinctions that scientists draw in the differentiated realm of
reality need not be deemed groundless, although they are not a matter of
being. This affirmation of the reality of the structures that scientists study is
not to deny that classical mystics oppose the discursive type of knowledge
of which science is the paradigm. Classical Daoism is a good example of
the rejection of such knowledge: the Daoists’ interest in nature remained
mystical and did not lead to a scientific interest in how things in nature
work (see Jones 1993: 127–46). We cannot simply equate any interest in
nature with a scientific interest in understanding the order behind things that
explains actions. Daoists go beyond conceptualizations in such a way that
they are able to flow more effortlessly with patterns inherent in nature, but
this does not mean that they have any scientific interests in finding and
explaining the efficient causes of those patterns. In the Daoist “forgetting”
state of mind (xu), our mind is no longer guided by our own mentally
conceived divisions. Rather, mystics respond spontaneously to what is
presented without the analytical mind. Even if mystics have internalized a
purpose for their actions, they are free of seeing the dualities and categories
that the analytical mind creates as projected onto reality. But again,
anything free of conceptions cannot guide scientific measurements or
theorizing: scientific theorizing is a matter of changing conceptions;
conceptualizations in scientific observations and experiments lead to
predictions, control, and manipulation rather than a simple mindfulness of
whatever occurs.
      In general, science cultivates the analytical mind and increases
attention to the differentiated and thus diverts attention from what mystics
consider essential for aligning our lives with reality. To Advaita, science is
concerned with only the content of a “dream.” Buddhism in general shows,
in Winston King’s phrase, a “disenchantment with the world,” including
any scientific interest in it. For mystical experiences to occur, we need to
empty the mind of what is central to science. The focus in mysticism is
working on the mind, but the aim is to achieve a knowledge inaccessible to
the analytical mind driving science. As a Sufi saying puts it, the mind is
“the slayer of the Real” because the analytical mind separates us from an
awareness of God. Thus, science and mysticism pull in opposite directions,
and most serious practitioners of either endeavor may very well dismiss the
other as a waste of valuable time and energy.
                        The Difference in Content
Both scientists and mystics make a distinction between appearance and
reality. However, they draw the distinction differently. For scientists, the
reality producing appearances is the underlying structures responsible for
what we experience in the everyday world, not beingness. (Nothing in
science per se requires finding the phenomena of the everyday world to be
unreal, only a type of reductive metaphysics does that. Scientific analysis is
not inherently reductionist: scientists can provide analyses of the makeup
and causes of phenomena without making the additional metaphysical claim
that the phenomena are not real. [See Jones 2013: chap. 3.]) Mystics, on the
other hand, are concerned with the real beingness underlying the “illusory”
conceptual creations we fabricate. In particle physics, atoms and their
components are impermanent eddies in a sea of energy; for mystics, there
are also impermanent eddies, but they are the macro level, everyday entities
arising from the connections of phenomena to what surrounds them. The
mystics’ claim remains about the beingness of the phenomena of the
everyday level: mystics did not have to wait for the physicists’ findings of a
lack of distinct entities on lower levels for confirmation—their claim about
everyday things would not be disconfirmed if physicists found permanent
realities on lower levels, or be confirmed if they found interconnectedness.
Thus, scientists and mystics are interested in the “fundamental nature of
reality,” but in different aspects of the reality behind appearances. Scientists
and mystics do converge on the abstract claim “There is reality behind
appearances,” but focusing on the abstract claim misses the substantively
different aspects of reality that are involved and the different approaches to
the world. Thus, the senses in which they deal with “appearances” remain
distinct. The same terms may be employed in mysticism and in discussions
of science, but this does not mean that mystics and scientists are discussing
the same thing.
      Similarly, the unity of being in depth-mysticism must be distinguished
from the unity of structures in a scientific “search for unity.” Any scientific
unity unifies apparently different structures, while in mysticism the oneness
of being has no parts to unify. These two concepts cannot be conflated:
mysticism is neutral on the question of whether scientists can reduce the
levels of structure to only one level, since the mystics’ concern is the
oneness of being, not the possible oneness or plurality of such structures as
electromagnetism and gravity. Mystics do not aim at a more comprehensive
unification than scientists or pursue a Grand Unified Theory (contra Weber
1986: 10) but deal with the oneness of a different aspect of reality. The
physicist David Bohm says, “The mystic sees in matter an immanent
principle of unity,” but he is referring to structures, not beingness, and he
admits that “some mystics” go beyond matter to the transcendent (ibid.:
144). In some mystical metaphysics, there is one source of all reality
(hence, of both being and structures), and thus a deeper unity than in
science, but this is still only a matter of the number of structures at work in
the natural world. In short, any “Theory of Everything” in physics would be
irrelevant to the mystics’ concern. Physicists are simply not doing what
mystics are doing. Perhaps if scholars used “identity of being” when
discussing such mystical systems as Advaita and not “unity” (which
suggests a unification of diverse parts), fewer people would be misled
concerning “oneness.”
      Consciousness figures prominently in both mindfulness and depth-
mysticism, but what mystics say about the nature of consciousness has
nothing in common with its alleged role in one interpretation of particle
physics. Nothing mystics say suggests that consciousness is one causal
force among other forces operating within the universe on the quantum
level or any other level. For mindfulness mystics, we create illusory
“entities” in the everyday world by erroneously separating off parts of the
flux of reality with our analytical minds; it is a matter of our everyday
perceptions and beliefs and has nothing to do with the idea that
consciousness is a possible causal factor in physical events. Depth-
mysticism also has no parallel. For Advaitins, consciousness is an inactive
search light, not an agent acting within the world in any sense.
Consciousness is not one element in the universe but is the only reality: it is
not a causal energy in the material realm that could interact with other
things in the “dream” realm—consciousness cannot interact with what is
“unreal” (matter), nor does it have structure or parts that could interact with
each other. Even claiming “all is consciousness” may be misleading: it
would naturalize Brahman into a field of conscious energy in the “dream”
world in which we all participate, and this goes against the Advaita tenet
that Brahman cannot be any type of object among objects or anything
experiencable as an objectified reality. It is not that mystics go further than
physicists on observation—what depth-mystics are claiming is
fundamentally different from any alleged interaction of the observer and
observed in particle physics or on another level. Perhaps if scientists
referred more to “quantum measurement” rather than “quantum
observation,” fewer New Age advocates would see consciousness as
playing a role in quantum physics.
     Nothing in mysticism suggests that mystics experience what physicists
postulate. Mysticism remains exclusively a matter of directly experiencing
the beingness of phenomena: the that-ness of everyday phenomena in
extrovertive mysticism and the source of the beingness of the self or all
everyday phenomena in introvertive mysticism. Mystical experiences may
affect our brain wiring and thus how we experience the environment that we
have evolved in, but absolutely nothing in the writings of the classical
masters remotely suggests that such experiences realize quantum-level
events or that through meditation mystics realize that energy comes in
discrete packets (“quanta”)—contra the undivided unity of depth-mysticism
or the borderlessness of phenomena in extrovertive mysticism, or any other
scientific item.14 At best, one could claim that depth-mystics experience a
Russellian “neutral monism” that is the source of both matter and mind;
they do not access particles on the quantum level or anything else about the
quantum level of organization. (And Advaitins would object that this would
make Brahman’s “dream” an objective reality.) Nor did any Buddhist
connect space with time in their analyses. Indeed, nothing in the Buddhist
teachings would predict that time is connected to space. Theravada
Buddhists in fact exempt space (akasha), but not time, from being
“constructed” (samskrita) (Anguttara Nikaya 1.286)—i.e., it is unaffected
by anything else. This makes space as independent and absolute as is
possible within their metaphysics and precludes any encompassing holism.
In classical Indian culture, space is a substance pervading the world, but it
is not the source of anything else—it is not any type of “field” connecting
everything with everything else, or out of which entities appear; rather, it is
a separate element. Nor do introvertive mystics connect space with time. It
is possible to see Brahman as an experiencable noumenon, although it
would be a featureless and structureless noumenon, but nothing suggests
that introvertive mystics experience the differentiated and extended “four-
dimensional space-time continuum” of relativity theory or the “ground
manifold state” out of which quantum phenomena emerge and are
reabsorbed—the “space-time manifold” is no more “pure beingness” than is
an object in the everyday world, since according to physicists it too is
differentiated and structured.
      It is not only that different states of consciousness are involved.
Mystics do not directly experience the same “truth” that scientists arrive at
tentatively or approximately through the route of theory and measurement.
Mystics do not reach a fundamental structure of reality while scientists fail
to do so. Each endeavor, if each is in fact cognitive, reaches something
fundamentally real but different: mystics experience unmediated beingness
or its source; scientists will discover the one fundamental physical level of
structure, or, under antireductionism, physicists and nonphysicists discover
multiple equally fundamental levels of structuring. Each pursues the depth
of a dimension of reality but not the same dimension. Neither is reducible to
the other. And whether there is a common source to both structure and
being or whether one in fact is more fundamental than the other in some
respect cannot be answered by scientific analysis or mystical experiences.
      The contents of science and mysticism will always remain distinct
since they diverge in the substance of their claims, and thus their theories
and ideas can never converge into one new set of theories replacing theories
in either science or mysticism. Thus, neither endeavor can replace or
incorporate the other. Nor do extrovertive mystical claims about the
impermanence and interconnectedness of the experienced everyday realm
in any way validate or verify or falsify scientific theories about underlying
structures. Conversely, scientific analysis is fundamentally nonmystical in
nature, with its focus on how the differentiated parts of nature affect each
other. For this reason, there can be no integration of science and mysticism
into one new, more comprehensive science—a new “integrated science of
nature” (contra Weber 1986: 1–19). No “collaborative effort” (contra
Zajonc 2004: 7) is possible because of their disparate subjects, let alone a
“synthesis,” “fusion,” or “conceptual unification” of the two endeavors.