Sociocultural Explanations of Mystical Experiences
Social scientists look for social or psychological conditions responsible for
mystical experiences. They note that people with certain psychological
dispositions or in certain groups are more inclined than most people to have
mystical experiences. Social scientists who are naturalists may, like Émile
Durkheim and Carl Jung, find religion to be a positive force for a person or
society, but they believe only natural realities are involved. Psychological
naturalists may explain ecstatic religious experiences as, for example,
surrogates for sex.15 Some naturalist social scientists go beyond using
social conditions to explain tendencies to have religious experiences—e.g.,
I. M. Lewis’s theory that religious ecstasy is a means of access to political
and social power for disenfranchised and marginalized groups (1989)—to
conclude that social factors are the only causal forces producing such
experiences (e.g., Fales 1996a, 1996b, 1999a). Mystical experiences are
reduced to mere “projections” of the true natural source behind them,
whether it is our own mind, our society, or some particular cultural
phenomenon. Our projections do not hit any realities outside of natural
phenomena, and thus the religious are deluded as to the actual causes of
their experiences. (For more on sociocultural reductions, see Jones 2013:
160–71, 174–75, 188–89.)
     Thus, reductive social scientists go beyond correlating mystical
phenomena with other sociocultural phenomena into denying any
transcendent element to mystical phenomena. Thereby, they are not only
explaining the occurrence of mystical experiences by specifying their
correlated sociocultural conditions but are explaining them away. Thus,
what they are doing is not comparable to a neuroscientist finding
correlations between brain states of meditators and their experiences.
Instead, it is like a neuroscientist making the philosophical judgment that
meditation involves no insights into the nature of reality but only involves
noncognitive internal brain events and thus is reducible to neural or
chemical correlates.