Mystics claim that their experiences give knowledge of a fundamental
reality, but it is important to note that the knowledge-claims in classical
mystical traditions are not the product of isolated mystical experiences: the
claims are always made in the context of an encompassing way of life
having spiritual practices, rituals, codes of conduct, and a specified goal, all
grounded in doctrines that must be learned about the nature of what is
deemed real. Such doctrines may not be of much interest to most
practitioners, but they hold a conceptually fundamental position in a way of
life. Mysticism is typically part of a religious way of life involving
transcendent realities. But in all cases, while mystical experiences are
central to mysticism, traditional mysticism cannot be reduced to merely
having experiences. The metaphysics of a given mystic’s tradition
determines what he or she takes as the actual knowledge given by a
mystical experience. Thus, a depth-mystical experience may involve an
unconceptualized consciousness, but what insight the experience is taken as
providing will be conceptualized after the experience and will depend on
doctrines and values outside the experience itself, coming from the mystic’s
way of life. That the mystics’ sense of oneness, immutability, and so on in
turn shapes a tradition’s doctrines complicates the picture (as discussed
below, some philosophers deny this), but the fact remains that experiences
alone are never the only factor for addressing the question of knowledge.
      Today people argue on many different fronts that mysticism is not in
fact about knowledge at all. Mystical experiences are merely considered
interesting psychological events having no cognitive significance, or
mysticism is only about attaining inner peace or becoming more
compassionate. Or meditation is only about purported psychological or
physiological benefits (but see Ospina 2007; Chen 2012; Sedlmeier et al.
2012). Or meditation only develops the centers of the brain connected to
states of happiness. Or mystical experiences at most increase our interest in
knowing fundamental things about reality, but they do not provide any
knowledge at all. That the Buddha taught one doctrine to beginners on the
path to enlightenment and another doctrine to more advanced followers
(e.g., Anguttara Nikaya 1.10) shows that mystics are not really interested in
doctrines at all but only in attaining the experiences—the doctrines do not
matter but are merely a raft to be jettisoned once we have the experiences.1
More generally, theory in yoga or any spiritual discipline only serves to
attain an experience, and thus ultimately it does not matter what theory one
holds—theory is just a device to quiet the mind, and any theory that does
that will do. Mystical teachings become no more than a pragmatic matter of
“whatever works” in inducing an experience of selflessness, not claims
about what is real. Thus, the doctrines in the end are irrelevant.
      However, in the classical traditions, mystical contemplation is
cultivated to gain alleged insights into the fundamental nature of reality so
that we can live in accord with what is actually real. That is, mystical
knowledge is not an end in itself—aligning one’s life with the fundamental
nature of reality is. The objective is a transformed life, not anything about
either disinterested knowledge or “developing our consciousness” per se.
Still, mystical experiences allegedly do ground knowledge about some
fundamental reality necessary to living correctly. All classical mystical
traditions contain doctrines about the ultimate nature of the world and
persons. They also have implicit knowledge-claims entailed by the
doctrines and practices of their ways of life depicting the way the world
supposedly is. For example, the Buddha accepted rebirth, even though it did
not receive an explicit defense in his time and even though the mechanics of
how it works have remained an issue for Buddhists.2 In addition, mystics
make claims about the nature of what is experienced in introvertive
mystical experiences, even while denying that such claims are possible.
Mystical experience is a matter, to quote the title of a Buddhist work, of
“calming the mind and discerning the real”—seeing the world “as it really
is” (according to each particular mystic’s belief-system). Thus, knowledge
is not just central to philosophers’ interest in mysticism but is important to
mystics themselves: only with the proper knowledge can they see and live
properly.