The Basic Question of Compatibility
Mysticism involves attaining certain experiences related to the beingness of
reality; so are all mystical ways of life totally unrelated to any social
concerns, including morality? Morality involves “horizontal” worldly
relationships between people, while mysticism involves an ontic “vertical”
orientation to being—so how can the two intersect? The transcendent
realities allegedly experienced in introvertive mystical experiences present
basic problems. If these realities are in fact beyond all attributes from the
phenomenal world, including moral values, how are action-guides such as
“love your neighbor as yourself” grounded in that reality? So too, desiring
good and abhorring evil are attachments, but enlightened mystics are free of
all attachments—so are they not “beyond good and evil” and indifferent to
all worldly values? The only this-worldly change that matters is the inner
remaking of oneself—does that not mean that the rest of the world must be
ignored? Thus, do mystics remain “other-worldly” and “world-denying,”
ignoring all this-worldly concerns and values as irrelevant? How can
mystics possibly value anything in the realm of multiplicity at all? Are
other persons worthy of respect? Do not mystics now see others as merely
manifestations of God or Brahman and thus not as fully human or capable
of truly suffering or really being helped? Do not mystical experiences
reveal everything in the world to be “perfect” simply as it is?
      Mystical cultivation raises certain issues. The virtues to be cultivated
are those that help a practitioner reach enlightenment, not necessarily those
that are morally good. Enlightenment is the determining value. Thus,
mystics cannot be deemed moral simply because they are on the path to
enlightenment—only their other-regardingness would establish that, not
their being mystical. What is mystically “good” is what leads to
selflessness, not necessarily a concern for others. This reduces “good” and
“bad” to nonmoral senses: what is “good” is what is advantageous to us in a
quest for enlightenment, and what is “bad” is what hinders us. Selfishness is
mystically wrong because it puts us out of step with reality, not because of
any moral concern for others. Thus, we should not be selfish only because
selfishness hinders us—other people have no claim, as morality requires.
      The resulting enlightened states present another set of issues. Even if
practitioners are moral on the path, need they be moral in the enlightened
state? Is the ethos of morality internalized and thus informing their actions?
Or is morality part of the unenlightened point of view, to be jettisoned once
one has attained enlightenment? Conversely, if mystics are nonmoral on the
path, how can they be moral in the enlightened state? There are four
possibilities: (1) mystics on the path are immoral or nonmoral, cultivating
their own self-development, but the resulting selflessness in the enlightened
state produces a spontaneous burst of concern for others and thus a life of
moral activity; (2) mystics are immoral or nonmoral on the path, and the
enlightened cannot act selfishly (since they have no sense of self), but are
nonmoral and have merely fully internalized whatever nonenlightened
value-system they happen to have been following on the path; (3) mystics
are moral on the path, but morality is only a part of the illusory dualistic
world that is to be transcended, and thus its value and its factual
presuppositions are bypassed in enlightenment, and so the mystics are again
nonmoral; or (4) morality is cultivated on the path and is fully internalized
in the enlightened life, and so the enlightened are now completely moral.
Since morality is valued so highly in the West today, scholars who have
been raised here may see only the fourth or perhaps the first possibility and
simply assume without any examination that the enlightened too must be
moral. Alternatively, they may dismiss all mysticism out of hand as morally
scandalous.
      Both factual and axiological issues arise: do the enlightened have the
factual presuppositions that make morality possible, and are they other-
regarding? It is not obvious that either condition is fulfilled. For example, if
all of this world is in any sense unreal, why do any actions matter? Or, if
everything is God or Brahman, again why do any actions matter, or why
does anyone matter? We could not hurt or help an unreal individual
“person” even if we wanted to since they are not real, nor could we hurt or
help a transcendent reality since it cannot be affected. Or, if the enlightened
believe they have no self, how can they be concerned with other, equally
nonexistent “selves”? Or even if such a concern were possible, why be
concerned for others? If the enlightened simply let things be, being neither
attracted nor repelled by anything, how can they show moral concern for
the state of others? If the enlightened are not driven by any purpose but act
spontaneously without attachments, how could they be moral?
      However, perhaps one can be both mystical and moral at the same
time. Mystics on the path need not treat others merely as means for their
own mystical advancement—a genuine concern for others would work to
weaken one’s self-centeredness and thus could be incorporated into a
mystical way of life as a mystical virtue. And, as discussed below, in the
enlightened state a sense of selflessness is also compatible with a concern
for equally empty other beings. Whether particular mystical belief-systems
and value-systems in enlightened states conflict with the presuppositions of
morality is an issue for investigation. We cannot settle these issues as
matters of definition. Nor can we magically make mystical traditions moral
simply by translating terms like “dharma” and “shila” as “morality.”
Instead, we need to examine specific mystical ways of life, both on the path
and in the enlightened state. The central questions are whether the
enlightened’s factual beliefs conflict with the presuppositions for the
practice of morality, and whether the value-systems of a mystical tradition
are in fact adopted for other-regarding reasons.
      And when various mystical traditions are examined (see Jones 2004:
79–298), we can see that there is no one simple relation of all mysticism to
morality. The terrain of mysticism and morality is more complex than is
indicated by the stereotype of the peace-loving, celibate, mystic sitting
serenely in self-absorbed meditation. Morality can be part of the self-
cultivation that is central to a path to enlightenment, but it need not be.
Mystics can be moral (clear examples being the Buddha, Mahayana
bodhisattvas, and orthodox Christians) or immoral (as with “left-handed”
Tantrikas still on the path2). So too, mystics can be “selfish” even without
the belief in a permanent entity called “a self”: one can still be immoral by
trying to enhance the well-being of one’s impermanent node in the web of
the universe at the expense of other nodes. Thus, pursuing selfishness is not
rendered irrational by the lack of a metaphysical belief in a self. Or one can
be nonmoral: immorality requires knowingly harming others, while
nonmorality involves adopting values other than immoral ones but being
indifferent to the welfare of others. That is, mystics are necessarily less self-
oriented, but they need not be other-oriented. One can be nonmoral in
valuing one’s own quest for enlightenment above all else and ignoring
others, but still not intentionally or knowingly harming others with one’s
other-impinging actions (as with Theravada Buddhists).
      Mystics’ beliefs can lead to inaction (as with the enlightened ideal in
Jainism and the chief option under Advaita), but not all mystics embrace the
passivity and moral quietism of “holy indifference” toward others. Quieting
the mind and will and becoming “resigned” to whatever God does does not
necessarily lead to moral indifference: a mystic can see his or her activity as
reflecting the “will of God,” and if the mystic sees God as moral this will be
reflected in actions. Indeed, many mystics (including Meister Eckhart) were
very active in society or in administering their religious institutions:
Plotinus was an arbitrator, a guardian of orphans, and planned a city;
Catherine of Siena administered a hospital; John of the Cross helped build
an aqueduct. Even the “quietist” Francois Fenelon was an effective bishop.
Teresa of Avila reformed her Carmelite order and founded new houses.3
Mystics’ actions need not be nonviolent but may in fact appear to the
unenlightened to be very harmful, as with Arjuna’s actions in the
Bhagavad-gita’s war. Mystics can be indifferent to the entire natural realm
(as with Advaita), or concerned with society (as with the Bhagavad-gita
and political Daoism). Moral mystics’ aid to others may be in terms of this-
worldly, material well-being (as epitomized by the Christian Eckhart
valuing giving a cup of soup to the sick over remaining in a mystical
experience [1981: 258]), or in terms of “other-worldly” aid in helping
others escape this realm entirely (as with the enlightened bodhisattvas). The
same basic worldview can ground both a nonmoral ethos and a moral one
(as with Buddhism). A conflict with morality may be a matter of values (as
with Theravada Buddhism and Advaita) or of the factual presuppositions of
morality (as with Advaita).4
      In sum, Steven Katz may well represent most Western scholars today
when he says: “it is difficult to find any major mystical figures, or mystical
traditions, that can be said to preach moral indifference, and certainly none
preach immorality” (1992b: 254). But those who have studied mysticism in
detail will agree that no all mystics “preach” morality. Rather, they will
agree with Jeffrey Kripal that the historical record of immoral mystics
cannot be written off as a matter of “perversions,” “abuses,” or
“exceptions” in order to preserve mysticism as a matter of “pure mystical
experience,” and that that also trivializes the pain and suffering of human
beings who suffered at the hand of immoral mystics (2002a: 53–55). This
variety of relationships of mysticism to morality raises the issue of whether
mystical cultivation or mystical experiences in fact have any particular
impact on morality at all. First, consider mystical experiences. Does any
extrovertive or introvertive theistic or nontheistic mystical experience
contribute anything to morality? Or are they morally neutral? During sitting
exercises or other passive forms of meditation or during an introvertive
mystical experience, one is obviously incapable of interpersonal action of
any sort and thus cannot act in a moral way, but do the experiences have a
value-component (moral or otherwise) informing a mystic’s encompassing
way of life outside those experiences? If not, what is the role of mystical
experiences when a mystic adopts the ethics of a way of life?