Natural Phenomena and Mystical Insights
In addition, even if scientists do discover, say, a drug that triggers a depth-
mystical experience 100 percent of the time, the basic issue concerning
physiological studies still remains: is an introvertive mystical experience a
purely natural phenomenon, or have the scientists merely identified the
conditions in the brain making a person receptive to the infusion of a
transcendent reality? Near-death experiences may set off a mystical
experience.27 Even stress, despair, or another severe psychological crisis
may be a way of breaking the grip our everyday life has on our mind,
thereby setting up the physiological conditions necessary for a mystical
experience. Unusual psychological states may be sufficient to set up the
base-conditions, but it does not follow that therefore the experiences do not
permit veridical mystical insights. Indeed, perhaps chemical imbalances or
other abnormal bodily states brought on by drugs, breathing exercises or
other meditative techniques, fasting or other ascetic practices, or whatever,
are needed to permit mystical states to occur. It is question-begging to assert
without further argument that only experiences occurring in the states of
consciousness evolved to deal with survival give knowledge of reality.
Drugs impair our ordinary cognitive and perceptual apparatus, but does this
rule out the possibility that they must do so to open the doors to other types
of cognitive consciousness? As William James noted, for all we know, a
temperature of 103 or 104 degrees Fahrenheit might be much more
favorable for truths to germinate and sprout in than is our ordinary body
temperature (1958: 30). Or as C. D. Broad put it, maybe we have to be a
little cracked to have peepholes into the super-sensible world. This may be
true at least for certain truths.
       Moreover, even if it turns out that mystical experiences are associated
with parts of the brain that more commonly produce hallucinations,
advocates of mysticism can turn this situation around and argue that the
hallucinations are the product of the malfunctioning of brain mechanisms
that when functioning properly enable veridical mystical experiences to
occur, even if the former are more common. For example, some
psychologists argue that dissociative states of schizophrenia and some
psychoses result from the same implosions of a transcendent reality that
occur in mystical experiences, but that the patients are not equipped to
handle them, and so the disconnect from a self or mundane reality produces
confusion and panic. Mystics, on the other hand, have a belief-framework
and the training or psychological preparation needed to handle the
disintegration of the mundane worldview and so can later successfully
reintegrate into the normal world (Brett 2002: 335–36). However,
naturalists may take the connection of mystical states and psychosis and
conclude the opposite: a mystical episode is only a perfectly natural, if
abnormal, state of mind resulting from a problem with the brain: psychotic
breakdowns and mystical states result from the same material processes and
cannot be differentiated in content (e.g., the loss of subject/object
boundaries). Simply because mystics have the mental training and
framework of beliefs to expect and handle the disintegration of the
mundane worldview calmly and thus can successfully reintegrate into the
normal world does not mean that any insights are involved. Mystics’
conceptual frameworks merely act like circuit breakers that keep the purely
natural disruptions under control. Thus, drugs and mystical techniques open
the same dangerous waters as in a mental breakdown, but mystical
selflessness is a more coherent mental state, and mystics do not conclude
that the experiencer alone is God. This would also explain the difference
between the mystic’s feeling of calm and bliss versus the psychotic’s feeling
of confusion and fear with the same loss of a sense of self, and why the
former can think rationally and live productively. However, it should be
noted again that these studies involve states of mind with visions and
voices, not the mystical states devoid of such content. In addition, the
mindful perception of the world can be explained without appealing to
psychoses (Deikman 1980; Austin 1998; Hölzel et al. 2011a).28
      However, the point of interest here is that once again the scientific
findings on the locus or brain activity of any particular mystical experience
will not themselves answer the philosophical question of whether the
experience is cognitive or not. Perhaps something like the parietal lobe (or
whatever the locus of a given mystical experience is) or disrupting the
activity in the brain is necessary for a being to have any mystical
experience, but this does not mean that therefore the experience is only a
product of that lobe or the disrupted mechanisms or that cognitive
experiences may not result.