Paradox
The most often cited instance of mystics’ blatant disregard for reason is the
violation of the laws of logic in paradoxes. And mystics do frequently say
something about what was experienced and then immediately deny it. But
paradoxes are not any counterintuitive claims or inadvertent
inconsistencies.14 Rather, they are purposeful combinations of the positive
characterizations of what is experienced and their denial. That is, positive
affirmations and their negations are knowingly linked in concise
contradictory statements.15 To many philosophers, mystics speak in
paradoxes simply because they have no coherent insights to state and so
they deliberately obfuscate. Critics take such remarks to be the height of
irrationality since we cannot consistently hold at the same time two beliefs
we believe are inconsistent. Thus, paradoxes are grounds for rejecting
everything mystics say about alleged transcendent realities.
      Consistency of statements and coherence of all of one’s beliefs do
seem to be basic to the idea of rationality.16 As a simple matter of the logic
of belief, to believe a claim is to believe it is true and to reject genuinely
conflicting claims as false. In dissent, some recent “dialetheists” in
philosophy argue that the law of noncontradiction should not be applied in
all cases, because some contradictions at the limits of our knowledge are
true and there may be adequate grounds for holding explicitly contradictory
beliefs. Walter Stace also believed that while some mystical statements are
true (1960a: 182–183, 298–99, 305), they are inherently paradoxical (ibid.:
270–74). If so, consistency would not be a necessary condition of
rationality. Graham Priest (2002, 2004) argues that all attempts at closure at
the boundaries of thought and of what is knowable in science lead to
contradictions—any conceptual process crossing those boundaries results in
the paradoxes of self-reference—but that these contradictions state truths,
and something contradictory about reality itself renders such contradictory
statements true. This position tolerates at least some inconsistencies in a
rational system of thought. Mysticism would be one such attempt at closure
leading to paradoxes. But if mystical paradoxes can be shown to have a
noncontradictory content, such a view of logic is not needed. To most
philosophers, even if the world itself is inconsistent, this does not mean we
should abandon reasoning about it in a self-consistent way—an
inconsistency in our assertions indicates only that we do not know what we
are talking about on that issue (Rescher & Brandom 1979: 139).
      For the vast majority of philosophers, no contradiction can state a true
fact. Most philosophers think that a statement cannot be intelligible without
obeying the laws of noncontradiction and the excluded middle. Any
“veridical paradox” requires “a repudiation of part of our conceptual
heritage” (Quine 1976: 9). How can two claims be true if they contradict
each other? How can I believe both that the Mets won the 1969 World
Series and that the Yankees won that series when I know there can be only
one winner? What exactly would my belief be about who won the series
that could comport with the facts? Even at the boundaries of thought, what
can a person be said to believe if his or her beliefs are a contradictory
muddle? How can a person believe what he or she cannot understand
coherently? Indeed, the basic principles of logic may merely make explicit
how language operates. And Bertrand Russell can rightly ask how can we
tell the difference between a paradox that veils a profound truth and one
that is simply nonsense? As Ronald Hepburn put it: “When is a
contradiction not a mere contradiction, but a sublime Paradox, a Mystery?
How can we distinguish a viciously muddled confusion of concepts from an
excusably stammering attempt to describe what has been glimpsed during
some ‘raid on the inarticulate,’ an object too great for our comprehension,
but none the less real for that?” (1958: 17).
      But are mystical utterances really incoherent? It should first be noted
that not all mystical utterances are in fact paradoxical. Paradoxes occur less
often in “thin” phenomenal descriptions of mystical experiences’
characteristics and more often in “thick” accounts of mystics trying to
understand what was experienced.17 Nevertheless, mystics do easily end up
speaking in paradoxes: they ascribe something to a transcendent reality
because it seems appropriate to what was experienced, but then because the
mirror theory of language they must immediately deny it since the reality is
not a phenomenal object and the unenlightened will assume words apply
only to such objects. Thus, they may say God is a person and not a person,
and so on. Or mystics may combine symbols in a way that appears
paradoxical, as with John of the Cross’s “ray of darkness” or Laozi’s “dark
brightness” to express the sense of experiencing a profound reality that
cannot be comprehended with the analytical mind. In introvertive
mysticism, the problem arises from the otherness of the transcendent
realities that are experienced. In extrovertive mysticism, the problem arises
from the fact that phenomena exist but are not distinct and self-existent, and
hence they are not “real” in that sense. From the Diamond-Cutter Sutra (3):
“However many sentient beings there are in the world of beings, … all
sentient beings will eventually be led by me to the final nirvana. … And yet
when this unfathomable number of living beings have all been led to
nirvana, in reality not even a single being actually will have been led to
nirvana.” This paradox of saving “nonexistent” beings plants a
contradiction at the very heart of the Buddhist bodhisattva way of life:
bodhisattvas see that sentient beings “do not exist” and yet they do not
abandon them but lead them to (an equally nonexistent) nirvana. And the
paradoxes do not stop there: the Prajnaparamita texts are replete with such
confusing claims as “Dharmas are not dharmas,” “The teaching is a
nonteaching,” “The practice is a nonpractice,” “The nature of all factors is a
nonnature,” “Bodhisattvas strive for enlightenment, but there is nothing to
strive for,” and “I am enlightened and yet it does not occur to me that I am
enlightened.”18 The Sanskrit in each case makes it clear that contradictions
are intended, even when consistent forms could have been stated in
Sanskrit.19 And the sheer length of the texts testifies to the fact that these
writers did not reject language in general. Thus, contradictions seem to be
part of their program (see Jones 2012c: 220–23).
      Sometimes paradoxes arise because a particular language cannot
express something nonparadoxically that another language can express
without contradiction. For example, in ancient Egyptian the word for
“south” was “to go upstream” and the word for “north” was “to go
downstream,” reflecting the direction of the northerly flow of the Nile
River. So when Egyptian soldiers encountered the Euphrates River, which
flows south, they had to call it “that circling water that goes downstream in
going upstream” (Wilson 1949: 45–46). The physical situation itself was
obviously not paradoxical, but their language simply could not handle what
the soldiers clearly saw. That is, a coherent idea may simply not be statable
in one particular language (see Henle 1949). (Also note that the soldiers’
conceptual framework did not control what they saw, contra constructivism:
it was because they could plainly see what direction the Euphrates was
flowing that they had a problem.)
      Perhaps the Egyptians came up with new terms to handle the situation
without contradictions, but the problem with mystical paradoxes does not
seem solvable by devising a new language. In practice, no language appears
to be more “mystical” than another—mystics East and West have the same
problem whatever their native language is. New uses are given to old words
through metaphoric extensions, and occasionally a new word is coined
(e.g., being “oned” with the One), but the denials of the applicability of
language to transcendent realities go on unabated. This indicates that the
problem mystics see with language lies with the very nature of any
language, and this explains why apparently no mystic has tried to invent a
new language. To be more precise, if the problem lies with how we
normally view language as working (i.e., the mirror theory), the problem
would remain even if some mystic did invent an entirely new language. No
new language will be exempt, since all languages must operate by making
distinctions: we would still tend to project onto reality whatever categories
the new language differentiated (and so extrovertive mystics would object),
and the unenlightened would still tend to reduce any designated
transcendent realities to merely unusual phenomenal ones (and so
introvertive mystics would object). And the paradoxes of affirming features
of reality and then denying them would remain.