A Mystical Revolution?
If adopting a worldview shaped by science does not require denying that
mystical experiences are cognitive of a transcendent dimension to reality,
mysticism today may in principle make a contribution to the world’s current
religious situation even for the scientifically minded. And there have been
religious reawakenings in the past when civilizations were in crisis.
However, factors militate against the widespread influence of mysticism on
religion, at least in the near future. First, as noted above, the spirit of the age
is antimystical, and the demands of mystical training may seem too
strenuous for most people.
      Second, if mystical and other spiritual experiences are in fact a normal
product of a healthy brain and common among the population at large, as
surveys suggest, then mystical experiences were probably also common in
the past without producing any social revolutions. And there is little reason
to suppose that mystical experiences today could have a wider cultural
influence than they have had in the recent past. Many New Age advocates
think that we are on the verge of a new stage in human evolution, but if
mystical experiences have been common throughout history, why should
we think that they would change society today, in our culture that values
self-assertion, if they did not produce a mystical society in the past,
especially when many experiencers today do not accept their experiences as
cognitive?7 In addition, mysticism remains focused on the inner changes of
individuals—changing society or advocating the social rights of individuals
is a relatively recent development in mysticism (see Johnston 1995: 254–
68, Jones 2004: 347–77). Throughout history, mystics also have tended to
be socially conservative except when coupled with a radical movement
arising for nonmystical reasons; thus, mysticism can easily become
counterproductive to social change (Ellwood 1999: 190). So too, a great
interest in mysticism in a society inevitably focuses energies on inward
experience that otherwise might have been used to effect outward change
(ibid.). In the 1960s, drug-induced experiences did not have a political
effect—the hippies had no institutional support system, and the only lasting
cultural effect was an increase in the general hedonism of the “Me
Generation,” which was followed by decades of greed. There is no reason
to think that the conditions are any different today. It may also be overly
optimistic to believe that we are seeing not only the twilight of older
religions but the birth of some new general spiritual revolution. The “New
Age” may remain nothing more than a fringe movement among the affluent.
      Third, it should not be forgotten that mysticism has a dark side.
Mysticism is not all peace and love—mystics have also supported
inquisitions, crusades, wars, and religious fanaticism, often in the name of
love. Spiritual rogues with feet of clay have also been narcissistic monsters
exploiting their followers. So too, drugs and meditation can aggravate
negative psychological conditions. It must be remembered that the basic
beliefs and values of a mystic come from outside mystical experiences. A
supportive social context, socially positive doctrines, and ethical values
must be integrated into a mystical way of life to give a positive meaning to
the experiences.8 Otherwise, rootless mystical experiences may only open
people to dangerous psychological events by releasing the subconscious
into the conscious mind or reinforcing one’s current unenlightened beliefs
and sense of self. A society dominated by such untutored mystics running
amok may be very unpleasant and dangerous, if it is viable at all. Certainly
looking on mysticism as a simple remedy for any of our social ills is a
mistake.