The Status of the World
As noted above, classical mystics in general are realists. It is a caricature of
mystics to see them all as world-denying. True, in introvertive mysticism, a
transcendent reality is affirmed, but the contingent reality of the world and
life is not necessarily denied as an illusion. In extrovertive “cosmic
consciousness” and mindfulness, the idea of a world of permanent, distinct
objects is seen as an illusion created only by our mind incorrectly seeing
what is really there, like taking a rope to be a snake, but there is a reality
there, just as there is a rope in the analogy. There are no hard and fast
boundaries between objects, and all objects are in flux, but this is not to
deny that there is some “objective” reality there that is normally
misinterpreted.8 Phenomenal reality is seen as lacking any permanent parts,
but it is seen as an interconnected, constantly changing web constituted by
impermanent “entities.”9 Entities become merely temporary eddies in the
flow of phenomena. In our unenlightened state, we do not directly see
things as they really are, but in mindful states the impermanence of entities
is central—in Prajnaparamita terms, the “thus-ness” (tathata) of things
(bhavas) is seen. In nature mysticism and cosmic consciousness, the glow
of beingness or the presence of a god shines forth. In all cases, what is real
is a beingness common to all that exists in the universe. How the simplicity
of the reality experienced in the depth-experience is related to our vast and
complex universe is an issue, but beingness is the “one” and its diverse
phenomenal manifestations are the “many.”10 (Thus, phenomena qua
phenomena are not identical to each other.) The one common beingness can
be seen in a grain of sand or any other object since it is the same in
everything.11
      Thus, extrovertive mystical experiences eliminate any metaphysical
options related to permanent phenomenal entities, including a phenomenal
ego. But other metaphysical options remain viable. For example, is time
real or merely a phenomenal illusion? That is, is time merely part of the
fabric of the “dream” realm and not applicable to what is finally real?
Mystical experiences appear timeless in the sense that temporal categories
are not part of the experience, but extrovertive mystics could accept that
time is part of the fundamental structure of the phenomenal world—
beingness is outside of time, but structured phenomena are not. Introvertive
mystics treat time the way they treat any this-worldly phenomenon. Mystics
also can follow the Buddha in leaving questions about the origin and extent
of the universe unanswered as simply irrelevant to their basic soteriological
concerns. Extrovertive mystics may also treat the phenomenal realm as the
ultimate reality with no transcendent source. They can also accept some
types of permanence within an impermanent and constantly changing
phenomenal realm. For example, Indian mystics could accept that the law
of karma is permanent—what it applies to is impermanent, but it itself is a
permanent structure lasting as long as the phenomenal world lasts. The
natural structures of scientific laws and any “natural kinds” would also fall
into this group. So too, according to Advaitins, the realm of illusion is well
ordered. In fact, although creation in Indian thought is the “play” (lila) of
the creator, even the creator is bound by rules manifested in creation.
      Abhidharmist Buddhists accept the “factors of the phenomenal world”
(dharmas) that are to be observed and analyzed in meditative states of mind
as merely momentary flashes, but real. Dharmas are not the same as entities
(bhavas), which are composite and thus not real in the ultimate sense. They
are not atoms of matter, but relate to how we experience the world.12 They
exist but are impermanent, and there is no unexperiencable noumena behind
them. We create the phenomenal world by giving phenomena “name and
form” (nama-rupa), but we do not create in some solipsistic manner the
beingness of reality behind the names. Mahayanists emphasize that all
dharmas are empty of independence and self-existence (svabhava) and arise
dependently on other dharmas, but they do not deny their existence as
“unreal” in any other sense (e.g., Mula-madhayamaka-karikas 24.19).13 In
the extrovertive Madhayamaka tradition, the phenomena of the world are
treated as dependently arisen, and thus the doctrines of “it exists” (i.e., that
phenomena are unarisen and thus permanent and eternal) and “it does not
exist” (i.e., that phenomena are totally nonexistent) are both denied (ibid.:
15.10). So too in early Buddhism (Samyutta Nikaya 2.17). With a
concentrated mind, one knows and sees things as they are (ibid.: 2.30)—one
sees their true nature (dhammata) free from any defect. This is considered
the highest knowledge (Anguttara Nikaya 5.36) or wisdom (prajna). In
terms of the Buddhist “two truths” doctrine, the entities we experience are
conventionally real—they are not totally nonexistent like the son of a barren
woman (which logically cannot exist) or the horns of a rabbit (which
empirically are not found to exist)—but ultimately they are not real in a
final sense either because they are not eternal, independent, or permanent.
(This criterion for what is real is shared by Advaita.) Buddhists do not
discuss the nature of being but leave the subject with noting the thus-ness
(tathata) of what we experience—i.e., its impermanence and interconnected
dependency.14
      In general, for extrovertive mystics only the “illusions” arising from
misreading what is real by our conceptualizing mind are denied. Thinking
of a tree as a distinct reality is erroneous, but there is a reality behind the
concept “tree,” even though it is impermanent, dependent, and connected
with the rest of reality: a tree is not identical to the earth, water, and sunlight
that it depends on for its life, but neither is it an entity totally distinct from
these; its configuration of elements remains a unique and identifiable part
contributing to the interconnected whole of reality. And so the concept
“tree” is still useful for directing attention to part of reality—the world does
not become a featureless blob simply because things share the same one
beingness and are interconnected. So too, modern extrovertive mystics
could treat matter, energy, and consciousness as different manifestations of
one cosmic “stuff.” From cosmic consciousness, the bliss of the experience
may lead one to see the universe as fundamentally compassionate or that an
innate self-giving love is the driving force underlying all of the world—a
theism or deism with pure love as the source. Richard Bucke saw the
experience as revealing that the universe is not “dead matter” but is a
“living presence” based in love; everyone and everything has eternal life;
God is the universe and the universe is God, and no evil ever entered into it
or ever will; and the happiness of everyone in the long run is absolutely
certain (1969: 17–18).
      But with introvertive mysticisms, there are different valuations of the
world in different religions. In Abrahamic theisms, the world is now seen as
created ex nihilo by God. But although the creation is “good” (Genesis
1:25), after the encounter with Greek thought traditional Christianity ended
up with the idea that the world is of no value in itself but is merely the stage
for the training of the soul for our return to our true home in heaven (or to
suffering eternally in hell). Indian mysticism generally also treats the world
as valueless—indeed, as a negative place to be escaped from.15 Daoism
gives a more positive valuation of the world, with all emanating from the
root Way (see Jones 2004: 229–30). Extrovertive mystics are able to ground
a real world in a transcendent idealism (see Marshall 2005). Or they can
follow the qualified nondualist Ramanuja: Brahman has no attribute-free
aspect but transforms itself into the phenomenal world. Or they can,
following Advaita, treat the underlying consciousness alone as fully real,
with all worldly phenomena classified as an illusion. In the Upanishads, the
phenomenal diversity of the world is real; for Shankara, it is an illusion.
      Emanation is popular in mystical traditions as the relation of a
transcendent source to the phenomenal world: the world is emitted from a
transcendent self-emptying “womb” or “abyss” or “nothingness.” If the
world is considered eternal, then emanation does not occur in time.
Extrovertive mystical experiences then are experiences of the surface
beingness, and introvertive experiences are experiences of the root depth
source of beingness. Emanationism is prominent in the West through the
mysticism of the Neoplatonist Plotinus: being (the totality of phenomena)
emanates from the One automatically by necessity, like the sun radiating
light. Meister Eckhart’s theology was based on the “ground of being”
(McGinn 2001: 37), and his metaphysics was an emanationism of an
outflowing of being (ibid.: 71–113; Eckhart 2009: 155): God “boils over”
into a trinity, and all phenomena “spill forth,” while the Godhead does not
act. Emanationism is also the basic position of the Upanishads and
Samkhya (concerning matter) in India and Daoism in China.16 To Shri
Aurobindo, unlike in Advaita, maya is a creative power arising from the
attributeless (nirguna) Brahman that produces the phenomenal world.
      Treating the world as a distinct creation of a transcendent reality
generates an unmystical ontic dualism: mysticism would tend to unite the
phenomenal realm with a transcendent ground. Samkhya is an exception,
with its dualism of eternal matter (prakriti) and a pluralism of eternal
persons (purushas) consisting of consciousness, which do not merge into
one reality. The Vedantist Madhva also gave a theistic dualistic
interpretation to the Upanishads. In the West, a separate creation was the
norm, but some theists, such as Bonaventure and Meister Eckhart, adopted
an emanationism. This can lead, as it did for Plotinus, to affirming the
reality of the emanated world and creatures, or it can lead, as it did for
Eckhart, to affirming that what is created is “nothing” apart from the being
shared by God. It can also lead to theorizing about a hierarchy of degrees of
being or consciousness.
      Christians can adopt a form of monism by adapting Acts 17: 28: in
God “we live and move, in him we exist.” But theists in general do not want
the world, with all its imperfections and suffering, to be part of God
—“corrupt” creation is usually kept completely separate from God, and any
ontic monism is rejected. Even Eckhart accepted souls as separate from
God, although they share one being. In general, theists reject anything
smacking of pantheism or anything that would contaminate the purity of a
creator god. The theologian Paul Tillich is an exception when he speaks of
the “God beyond the God theism”—i.e., the nonpersonal “power of being-
itself” (1952: 188). Nevertheless, in traditional theism God is present in
some way in his creation, since he sustains it (creatio continua)—the world
is ontologically dependent on God and would cease to exist without his
support. Thus, God is both transcendent and immanent even for theists, but
theists want to maintain paradoxically that God is in all things and yet all
things are not in God.
      Thus, God in theism is “more real” than the world in that the world
could not go on existing without him—the alternative is that the world is
somehow independent and autonomous, which theists do not want to
accept. However, this devaluation of the world in theism can also lead to
Shankara’s conclusion: only the transcendent being is real, and an
independent world is only an imagined illusion. God created separate souls
and the phenomenal universe, and so God can remove their contingent
existence by withdrawing his ontic support, which gives them being. Some
Sufis, along with some medieval Muslim and Christian theologians
espousing “occasionalism,” deny any real causal order to nature: the
admission of such “secondary causes” would deny the absolute control over
all things by the only real cause—i.e., God. To theists, the world is not
inherently evil as it was to Gnostics, but it is still merely something God
created and something he can end. In Plato’s allegory of the cave, what we
focus on every day are only the unreal shadows on the cave wall and not on
the source causing the shadows: we are preoccupied with the images and
forget their true status and their true source.
      For Advaita, the world is mere appearance—Brahman alone is real.
Advaitins do not explain why there are structures or any orderliness at all in
this realm, since Brahman has no properties. Nor do they explain the
violence and cruelty of the natural suffering of the phenomenal realm when
its only reality is Brahman. Even the appearance of a realm of illusion
(maya) is a problem, since Advaitins reject any sort of emanation from a
source. Rather, the phenomenal world and our bodies are the products of
our root-ignorance (avidya). From the highest point of view, the
phenomenal world is simply an illusion. But why there is a root-ignorance
at all that creates this “dream” realm of maya is unexplained. Nor has
Advaita an adequate answer to the question of who has the root-ignorance:
it cannot be Brahman because the real cannot possess anything unreal; and
it cannot be individual persons since they are nonexistent. So too, what
would be an optical illusion if all is mind-stuff is not clear. There is also the
problem of why the general illusion of this differentiated realm persists
after one is enlightened (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 4.1.15)—it should vanish
when ignorance is replaced with knowledge of Brahman (vidya), since
according to Shankara this knowledge destroys ignorance and cannot
coexist with it. But according to Shankara, diversity is still seen even
though the enlightened know better, just as people with an eye-disease see
two moons even when they know better (ibid.: intro.). This means that even
the enlightened still perceive a diverse realm. To Shankara, Brahman in the
form of the god Ishvara projects a totally illusory phenomenal world that
persists after an (equally illusory) individual gains enlightenment.17 The
enlightened know this world is really Brahman—the root-ignorance
(avidya) of the unenlightened is seeing the world as real (i.e., existing
independently from Brahman) and consisting of multiple distinct entities.
The enlightened still see Ishvara’s projection, but now it is a matter of
“lucid dreaming”: they still see the phenomenal “dream” world, but they
now know its true ontic status as only Brahman. Shankara’s answer for why
the enlightened remain in the world after enlightenment is that karma that
has begun to bear fruit must run its course even after enlightenment before
the enlightened can die (Bhagavad-gita-bhashya 4.20–21). That is, once
karma begins to produce effects, nothing can stop it. But this would mean
that karma can overpower knowledge—i.e., karma has some reality with
power even over the enlightening knowledge of Brahman. But that is
something that Advaitins should reject. All that Advaitins say about the fate
of the universe as a whole is that it will disappear when all (illusory) selves
are enlightened by ending root-ignorance and are thereby removed from the
(equally illusory) chains of rebirths (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 2.2.41)—there
then will be no more karmic desires driving the generation of new worlds.
      Thus, to Advaitins, an eternal, all-pervading consciousness constitutes
the appearance of the world.18 The world is the “play (lila)” of Brahman
and has no other explanation: the world appears for no reason or purpose
(Brahma-sutra-bhashya 2.1.33)—manifesting the world is just what
Brahman does naturally and without an act of will, like breathing is for us.
To Shankara, the phenomenal world is not a creation or emanation of
Brahman in any sense, but only an appearance that our root-ignorance
imposes on Brahman, the unchanging and inactive knower that cannot be
part of the phenomenal universe. Thus, Brahman is not a cause of the
universe, since what is real cannot cause something unreal and phenomenal
appearances are unreal. All of reality is contained in each “object,” just as
the sun is reflected in full in each ripple on a pond (e.g., ibid.: 3.2.11). But
just as the clay is real and the form of the pot is unreal, so too the being of
this realm that is Brahman is alone real (ibid.: 2.1.14). The natural realm
thus is neither real nor unreal—neither the same as Brahman nor totally
nonexistent—and thus its ontic status is indeterminate and indescribable
(anirvachaniya).
      The doctrine of the world as “play” points to another issue: mystical
experiences in themselves do not answer why we are here, how we fit into
the scheme of things, or what the meaning of the world is. Mystical
experiences may give an overwhelming sense of reality, but these
experiences focus attention totally on the present, not on the history of the
universe as a whole or on the question of how things might fit into a big
picture. The experiences may convey a trust in reality but not any future-
oriented hope for a specific course of events. No plan or purpose to the
natural realm is given in the empty depth-mystical experience or in the love
of a theistic experience. Theistic mystics may feel loved, but there is no felt
sense of any teleological causes at work in nature. Rather than feeling self-
centered and isolated from the rest of reality, mystics may feel fully
integrated into the natural world or more connected to a cosmic source, and
any fear of death may end. They may feel complete and at home in the
universe and that everything is all right.
      Thus, after having a mystical experience, mystics may think
everything in the world is as it should be or is even inevitable as it is.
Mystics often have a sense of a fundamental rightness at the deepest level
of things as they are, and a sense that the universe is meaningful. This can
lead to the idea that creation is perfect. But this may lead theistic mystics
who have an overwhelming sense of a loving source to deny that evil is real
—everything is actually perfect as is. Suffering and death may cease to
matter, if they are considered real at all, since they do not affect what is real
(i.e., what is eternal). (That this may negatively influence a desire to help
others will be noted in chapter 9, as will the fact that an experience of an
underlying love or joy only deepens the mystery of natural suffering.) In
fact, the acceptance of life as “meaningful as is” may end our mind’s search
for any specific meaning or purpose or any other explanation of reality. A
sense of connectedness may end the existential quest to find life’s meaning,
even though no new facts or a statement of a meaning is given in mystical
experiences. After a life with only the instrumental mode of consciousness,
awareness of the beingness of reality may make one’s life seem to make
sense or make one feel more connected to others and the world. The sense
of euphoria in the nonconceptual experience of beingness may give a sense
of meaningfulness to reality—that everything is imbued with significance—
even if one realizes after the experience that no specific “secret of the
universe” has been revealed.19 Mystics may be content with the world as it
is, and any resulting claims on the “meaning of life” may sound trite since
no new information is given. In any case, mystical experiences do not
provide a specific answer to the meaning of the universe, to whether there is
life after death, or to the basic philosophical question in cosmology of why
there is something rather than nothing. Each religious tradition’s ideas of
the purpose of life, like its understanding of the mystical experiences
themselves, come from considerations outside of these experiences,
although the experiences may be one such consideration.
       In addition, the basic mystery of the nature of beingness is not
dispelled by having any type of mystical experience. Beingness may be
apprehended in a mindful state or its simplicity directly apprehended in the
depth-mystical experience void of any differentiated content, but no new
information about its nature is provided in either experience. No answer is
given to the question of the relation of an underlying “being” and the realm
of “becoming”—the problem of “the one” and “the many” remains as
profound for mystics after even depth-mystical experiences. Extrovertive
and introvertive mystical experiences may increase a sense of awe and
wonder at the that-ness of things, but they may not—one may serenely or
joyfully accept the mundaneness of all of the phenomenal world. And
introvertive mystical experiences may lead to a sense that the natural world
is not ultimately real. If anything, the mystery of beingness is increased, not
diminished, by such experiences.