Mysticism and the Closure of Mystery
We are more aware today of the variety of viable mystical metaphysics, and
this should lead to more caution about any one particular metaphysics being
accepted as obviously correct. Nothing new about any transcendent reality
is being discovered today through the replication of mystical experiences.
And since there can be no further original mystical experiential input, there
is no way to test claims empirically. Any future changes in mysticism will
come about only by reflecting changes in cultural interests. Thus, mystics
should accept the central mystery of transcendent realities: what is
transcendent cannot be like anything our dualistic mind can conceive.
      In such circumstances, mystical doctrines become a shield against the
openness of this mystery in order to live in the world. One tradition’s
speculation about transcendent realities is no more reasonable or likely to
be correct than any other informed guesses. Even mystics are not in a
position to supply the answers to metaphysical matters. What conclusions
about the general nature of the phenomenal world can we draw on the basis
of inner experiences alone? Thus, the mystically minded should avoid
delving into theological intricacies. In addition, as Agehananda Bharati
said, mystics as theologians are as good or bad as they were before they had
their mystical experiences (1976: 59). Only one aspect of reality is
illuminated in mystical experiences (beingness), and the experiences do not
make mystics experts on all things metaphysical. Nor do mystics have to
deal with all metaphysical issues of interest to nonmystical persons. Even
an issue considered indispensable in the West—the origin of the universe—
has been ignored by traditions that assume the universe is eternal and
uncreated but dependent on transcendent realities. The classical Chinese
basically ignored the whole issue (although the Daodejing has a little on it,
e.g., chap. 42). And many mystics have gotten along perfectly well without
addressing the issue. But most importantly, in light of the diversity of
mystical metaphysics, metaphysics for the mystically minded should be
seen today as inadequate human efforts at understanding, and the mystery
behind our efforts should be given more prominence—a mystery that
remains greater than any experience. Mystics are not moving toward a
consensus in metaphysics, and any consensus would not necessarily be the
correct answer. It would still only be speculation. Even if one worldview
does happen to be better than others, we are not in a position to prove which
one that is.
      Thus, mystics should accept that they have no certainty about the
nature of any purported transcendent realities. This lack of certainty
concerning doctrines may lead to the conviction that inducing experiences
alone is important: introvertive experiences can lead to one’s own certainty
that there is more to reality than the natural realm, but no further
understanding is possible, and so attaining the experiences is all that
matters; thus, there is no point in describing the experienced state. But
metaphysics does matter as long as mysticism is about more than simply
cultivating experiences: mystics need beliefs to align a way of life with how
they see reality. Thus, each mystic will have to accept some set of beliefs at
least provisionally. However, the fact remains that even if there is an
unvarnished contact with transcendent realities in mystical experiences,
mystics are not in a position to know the full nature of what was
experienced.
      Overall, any metaphysics that directs attention away from experiences
does not lead to edification in mysticism. Metaphysics in mysticism starts
out as a way to remove mental clutter, but there is always the danger that
the metaphysics may ossify and become a block to mystical experiences by
becoming a new form of mental clutter. Such a hindrance is especially
possible when the metaphysics that is adopted is from a tradition whose
interests are primarily in nonmystical matters. But dogmatism occurs in
Buddhism as well as in theisms such as Christianity. To be true to
mysticism, mystics today should keep experiences central and accept any
doctrines related to the experiences only tentatively and with caution.
Experience should not be replaced with conceptualizations: one can
experience transcendent realities without conceptualizing them or when
accepting incorrect doctrines.
      However, mystics may suffer from the same compulsion as the
religious in general to stifle mystery. To accept that we know little of the
nature of transcendent realities is not spiritually satisfying. But the thirst for
transcendence in religion is not necessarily a thirst for mystery. (As the quip
goes, religion is like vaccination: it gives people a small dose of mystery in
order to avoid any bigger attack.) Theology, in particular, squelches
mystery. As paradoxical as it may seem, in the words of David Burrell, the
“quintessential theological task” is “to know the unknowable God” (1986:
2). If William Alston is correct, contemporary Anglo-American
philosophers of religion exhibit considerable confidence in their ability to
determine what God likes and his basic attributes, purposes, plans, values,
and so on, and to determine these in some detail (2005: 99). Theologians
will no doubt continue to pontificate on the “mind of God.” And
theologians have become quite ingenious in dealing with the problems that
basic doctrines generate—e.g., God is both timeless (i.e., existing outside of
time) and temporal (existing eternally throughout time and so knowing all
temporal matters); or God voluntarily limits his omniscience and
omnipotence to permit our free will; or God voluntarily limits his being to
permit room for creation; or the Godhead is not nonpersonal but
“transpersonal”—but all of this must be deemed nonmystical speculation.
      Thereby, the sense that we understand is substituted for the reality of
mystery. The analytical function of the mind is substituted for receptive
stillness, and words are substituted for silence. Theological constructs
become the center of attention, not the experiences that would keep
theological construction tied to a transcendent reality. Mystical experiences
in the end have not slowed theological speculations. Mystics may remain
humble before the mystery of transcendent realities, but tentativeness can
be especially difficult when one believes that one has been in contact with
the supreme reality. Add to this the religious authority of their tradition that
mystics routinely accept: revelations answer some mysteries, and a mystic
may well conclude that his or her tradition has the final answers to religious
mysteries. This in turn can also easily lead to intolerance of other traditions’
answers.
      Thus, the mystics’ bedrock religious commitments can lead to
imposing some closure on the mystery of transcendent realities. In addition,
due to the power of their experiences, it is difficult for mystics not to ask
more about what they have experienced, or to maintain openness and a
sense of mystery when they think they have been in contact with the
ultimate reality, or to maintain a skeptical stance and renounce all
substantive transcendent beliefs and be silent. Indeed, the writings of
classical mystics indicate that they were not at all skeptical: they typically
believed that their particular system is correct or at least the least
inaccurate, and that anyone having a mystical experience would confirm
these beliefs.
      But again, the conflicting claims of the different mystical ways of life
indicate that mystics, despite their experiences, are still not in a position to
comprehend the fundamental nature of what they experience. Thus, the
mystery of a transcendent reality remains even for mystics who are aware
of such a reality. Paradoxically, here is a case of something that is “bright
and dazzling” to the mystics and yet is equally deep and mysterious. In the
end, mystics may have a broader base of experiences from which to judge
what is real, but they know very little about the nature of any transcendent
reality, even if these experiences are genuine.
      In sum, the search for understanding easily replaces the experiential
orientation of mysticism. There is a very strong urge to supply an answer
and not remain agnostic. Even the mystically minded are liable to end up
with the philosopher’s disease of demanding a “because” for every “why”
question, even when we are not in a position to supply one. And theologians
can get caught up in epicycles of their own constructs generating new
intellectual mysteries. Mystics too can fall prey to this problem: over time,
doctrines and explanations can become as central to mystical traditions
within different religions as to nonmystical religiosity. Affirmative theology
can push out the via negativa, and doctrines can eradicate any experiential
urge.
                                     6

                       Mysticism and Language