Mystical Utterances and Knowledge
The congruence of transcendent and phenomenal properties is the basis for
claiming that mystical utterances state cognitive claims about a
transcendent reality. Even if all mystical utterances have a metaphorical
component, the experiences can still provide the foothold needed to make
the statements meaningful. As mentioned in chapter 3, in an analog to the
causal theory of reference for scientific claims, what is experienced in
theistic or nontheistic mystical experiences can be seen as grounding the
cognitive utterances despite changing symbols and conceptions. It would be
like the seeing and handling of a cube grounding drawings of the cube. No
literal statements—i.e., statements that do not need a metaphoric extension
—would be required to ground meaningfulness.19 The “sense” of the reality
may be specifiable only through changing and limited metaphors, but the
referent does not require literal depictions if the reality can be experienced
directly.
     But again, because of the ontic difference between the world and
transcendent realities, mystics must always stretch everyday concepts and
images. Plotinus’s figure of the One as an ever-full spring shows the
problem. We know what a spring is, but how are we to understand a spring
that has no origin, is never emptied, is ever-flowing, and yet always full?
Perhaps we can mentally extrapolate the everyday properties into infinite
ones, but we would still be thinking in terms of phenomenal objects with
infinite properties. Positive remarks will always be limited in that regard.
So too with more literal, nonfigurative descriptions. We know how material
objects “exist,” but how do transcendent realities “exist”? An analogy such
as the dreamer being “more real” than the characters in the dream and being
the source of whatever reality the dream characters have can only take us so
far in understanding how a transcendent reality exists and is a source. So
too with the Advaita image of the world as a magical illusion (maya) to
show its lack of independent existence and its outwardly deceptive
character.
     This highlights the problem of whether nonmystics can understand
mystics when mystics give positive characterizations. Whether such
utterances are meaningful to the unenlightened ultimately depends on
whether the metaphoric discourse supplies a meaningful mystical content to
them. Arguably such discourse does. The unenlightened can understand the
point of a metaphoric utterance well enough to understand mystical claims
even if they do not know exactly how it is applicable and why it is
appropriate. But as David Hume said, a blind person can form no notion of
color or a deaf person of sound. So too here: the unenlightened cannot stand
in the shoes of mystics. But mystics form appropriate conceptualizations of
what they experienced after their experiences, and nonmystics may be able
to follow these statements and images in the direction of transcendence.
Understanding any mystical use of metaphor requires some imagination.
Sympathy for what mystics are trying to do is not enough. The
unenlightened will always be stuck having to rely only on their nonmystical
understanding of the terms. Any metaphor used to communicate something
beyond what the listener has already experienced only becomes clear once
the intended experience has occurred. Mystics can do no more since a new
experience is required to reorient the sense and use of the images and
concepts. Thus, there are limits, but following the analogies and metaphors
in the direction of transcendence (i.e., away from the phenomenal world
via, for example, the “dream” analogy) seems sufficient to make mystical
utterances minimally intelligible to the unenlightened.
      This also raises the question of whether the normal meanings of terms
are transformed in attempts to denote transcendent realities. The drawing of
the cube points to a three-dimensional cube, but the drawing works only if
we uproot the implications that a two-dimensional object is involved, and
the same is true with mystical utterances. In effect, a concept or statement is
emptied of its normal denotation and filled with one given in a mystical
experience. Does this mean that, for example, “good” means something
different when mystics say that God is good? But if God’s goodness is
utterly unlike ours, then the term “good” does not apply and we have no
idea what God is like in this regard. Mystics often say things that suggest
that the transcendent’s properties are so different that the phenomenal
meaning of the terms does not apply. As Eckhart said, God is not “good,”
“better,” or “best,” or “wise” (2009: 463). But if this is more than simply
hyperbole, there is a problem: only if the meaning of the terms remains the
same can any analogies or metaphors work, just as some features of the
drawing of the cube (e.g., the straight lines) remain the same in the cube
itself. If our terms do not apply to the new subject, we are consigned to
silence. Even “exists” or “is” could not be used.
      However, if the mirror theory of language is rejected, mystics do not
need to take that route: terms for worldly phenomena could be used while
stressing the wholly other ontic nature of transcendent realities without any
change of meaning. For example, theists can affirm that a transcendent
reality is personal in nature: God may be “transpersonal,” but he was some
personal quality in the human sense. So too, God’s and humans’ goodness
are alike in some way, even if God’s is greater and purer. Similarly, the
words “exists” and “is” mean the same for transcendent realities as for
phenomenal ones even though their modes of existence differ. The problem,
in sum, is not the literal meaning of the terms when it comes to transcendent
realities, but that these realities are not phenomenal objects and that only by
a mystical experience can we see how the terms apply.20
                                  Negation
The primary way that introvertive mystics counter such positive
characterizations is by negating any possible characteristic of transcendent
realities since such realities are unlike anything phenomenal. Hence images
of “darkness” and “nakedness.” In a remark echoed by Augustine about
God, Plotinus said that we can state what the One is not, not what it is
(Enneads 5.3.14). To Shankara, words like “Brahman” and “self” are
superimposed on the real (satya) since describing the real without recourse
to limiting adjuncts (upadhis) is an “utter impossibility” (Brahma-sutra-
bhashya intro., Brihadaranyaka-upanishad-bhashya 2.3.6). But he asserted
that all “positive” characterizations of Brahman—reality, knowledge, and
infinity—are only meant to remove other attributes: Brahman cannot be the
agent of knowing, for that requires change and denies reality and infinity;
knowledge merely negates materiality; and reality and infinity negate
knowledge (Taittiriya-upanishad-bhashya 2.1.1). It is all a process of
negation (apavada). And since the real is in fact free of all differentiations,
we are left with describing it as “not this, not that” (neti neti) to remove all
terms of name, form, and action. More generally, mystics want to say that
“human language”—as if there were another kind—does not apply and so
must be negated.
      Thus, mystics are major advocates of the via negativa—the denial of
any possible positive description of the transcendent. In the
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, brahman/atman is famously described as “not
this, not that” (2.3.6, 3.9.26, 4.2.4, 4.4.22, 4.5.15), thereby denying all
features to it. So too, as discussed in the next chapter, the Buddha denied
that any concepts concerning existence “fit the case” of the state of the
enlightened after death (Majjhima Nikaya 1.431, 2.166). Affirming any
option—the enlightened “exists,” “does not exist,” “both exists and does
not exist,” or “neither exists and does not exist”—would show a
misunderstanding (since these terms apply only to dharmas and after death
the enlightened have no dharmas) and give a mental prop to which we may
become attached (Samyutta Nikaya 4.373–402). Buddhists later developed a
theory of meaning based on excluding what is not intended by a word. The
via negativa approach was introduced into the Western theistic traditions
through Neoplatonism. Plotinus said no words apply to the One (Enneads
6.8.13). For example, the One cannot be a “cause” since that term applies to
phenomenal actions. He repeated this regarding “the Good” and even “the
One” (ibid.: 3.8.11.12–13, 5.5.6.22–23). Any property is a characteristic of
being, not the One, and so all properties must be denied (ibid.: 6.9.3).
Eckhart said that God is “neither this nor that”—God is a nongod, a
nonspirit, a nonperson, a nonimage detached from all duality; he is not
goodness, being, truth, or one (2009: 465, 342, 287). So too, God is beyond
all speech (ibid.: 316–17).
      If a transcendent reality is indeed utterly unlike the components of the
world, one can ask why negative terms (e.g., nonpersonal) would then not
apply. If Brahman is not a person, then the statement “Brahman is not a
person” is true. Philosophers, thinking in terms of phenomenal objects,
naturally believe that if x is not p, we can affirm the negative statement “x is
not-p.” However, problems arise when it comes to mystical discourse. First,
mystics may assume that if we affirm the negative claim, the unenlightened
will always be thinking in terms of discrete entities (contra extrovertive
mysticism) or in terms of phenomenal objects and not be directed toward
transcendent realities (contra introvertive mysticism). We could affirm the
negation as true, but unless we reject the mirror theory of language it would
still be misleading. We can say “The number 4 is not blue,” but to start
thinking of numbers in terms of color only directs the mind away from the
true nature of numbers. So too with any affirmation of negative
characterizations of transcendent realities. The problem again is that a
transcendent reality is not a phenomenal object to which the idea of
“nonpersonal entity” would apply. The danger is that any negative
characterizations would still render a transcendent reality an x—a thing
within the world among other things. Thus, mystics would object even if an
exasperated philosopher exclaimed “Well, at least Brahman is not a rock!”
(And if Brahman is the true substance of all phenomena, then a rock is
Brahman.)
      Second, if there is only one transcendent reality, it may appear to be,
for example, personal in some experiences and nonpersonal in others.
Theists will assert that the transcendent-in-itself is personal and only
appears nonpersonal in experiences of its beingness; Advaitins will assert
the reverse. Thus, to assert that the transcendent is nonpersonal would be to
side with Advaita in this dispute on the true ultimate nature of the
transcendent and not merely to make a formal remark about the logical
status of a reality that is “wholly other.” And Advaitins even object to
labeling Brahman nonpersonal: through the mirror theory, this makes
Brahman into an entity. Even Brahman without features (nirguna) is a
conception from the analytical mind and so does not reflect the transcendent
reality-in-itself. This means that the transcendent reality is not personal or
nonpersonal: in itself, the reality does not possess contradictory
phenomenal properties but is beyond any conception we can devise or its
negation. (Also see the electron example in chapter 3 and in the next
chapter.) In sum, it is not possible to say that a transcendent reality-in-itself
has any phenomenal property or its opposite.
      The via negativa thus protects openness and the mystery of the
transcendent. It also directs the listener’s mind away from the natural realm.
But maintaining a pure via negativa is difficult for mystics—even Zen
eventually adopted a more positive approach. It is especially difficult to
maintain for theists who see what they have experienced in terms of a
moral, caring person. The theologian Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite, the
father of the via negativa in the Christian tradition, claimed God is
ultimately a “divine darkness” beyond any assertion or negation, but he also
wrote a book on the symbolism of divine names (although he stressed that
God cannot be fully captured by any names). To Shankara, the process of
negation leaves something real since we can only negate something by
reference to something real (Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.2.22). Thus, he
maintains that there is a real basis to superimposition while asserting that
Brahman as an object of thought is a product of root-ignorance, either in the
lower form as the god Ishvara (Brahman as qualified) or the higher form
(Brahman as the opposite of all qualifications) (Brahma-sutra-bhashya
1.1.11, 1.2.21).
      Indeed, for mystics there is always a basic affirmation beyond the
negations—a reality that is experienced. Thus, although the via negativa is
a movement beyond affirmations, it is never merely a denial—there is a
“negation of negation.” Plotinus introduced the notion of “speaking away”
(aporia apophasis) in the West, but it was never entirely negative.21
Certainly the reality of a transcendent reality is not denied by theistic
mystics, even if it is Eckhart’s “Godhead beyond God.” Rather, the
transcendent reality is beyond both the affirmation and negation of worldly
attributes. Negation thus may be applied because a mystic thinks what was
experienced is so much more than any terms for phenomenal reality could
convey. That is, a reality is known but cannot be described because it is
greater than anything any description could capture. Eckhart, even while
utilizing the word “God,” said that God is nameless because he is “above all
names”—if we gave him a name, he would have to be thought (2009:
139).22 So too, saying God is “beyond good” does not mean he is evil;
rather, even the label “good” cannot be applied to him because he is so
much more. Dionysius said that we attribute an absence of reason and
perfection to God because he is above reason and is above and before
perfection (The Divine Names, chap. 7). Nevertheless, the negation of
phenomenal attributes does indicate the direction of another dimension of
reality and thus has soteriological value.
      However, one must ask how a “negation of negation” differs in the end
from the affirmative approach discussed above, and whether, as Plotinus
said, the “sheer dread of holding to nothingness” forces mystics back to the
everyday realm of language (Enneads 4.7.38.9–10; see also 6.9.3.4–6). This
approach does not deny that there is some positive reality but only
emphasizes its otherness and its lack of phenomenal properties and directs
attention away from the phenomenal realm. And the basic danger of the
mirror theory will remain that the unenlightened will translate anything
mystics say into a statement about an object within the world. To say
“Brahman is not open to conceptualization” does not conceptualize
Brahman, but it involves a conceptualization, and our conceptualizing mind
will treat it as any other conceptualization. The danger is of merely
separating one object from other objects by the process of negation. We
would still think in terms of a phenomenal entity without certain attributes.
We would merely attribute a negative property to the new entity, and as
Walter Stace (1960b: 134) and others point out, there is no principled way
to make an absolute distinction between positive and negative attributes—
we still take negation as affirming another property. Even attributing
“nonbeing” to a transcendent reality or saying that “it does not exist” still
produces an image in the mind of an object set off from other objects.
Perhaps this is why Dionysius said that neither affirmation nor negation
applies to God (Mystical Theology, chap. 5).
      Nonmystical theologians besides Dionysius have also emphasized the
via negativa. Thomas Aquinas wrote “we cannot know what God is but
rather what he is not” (Summa Theologiae 1a.3). Anselm could make “that
than which nothing greater can be conceived” into an object of reasoning
and comparison.23 Today books can be written on the via negativa without
any reference to mystical experiences (Turner 1995; Franke 2007). Part of
this is the postmodern contention that mysticism is nothing but a matter of
language, but this also shows that the via negativa is not a device utilized
only by those who have had mystical experiences. It can be simply a
speculative theological strategy for working out the logic of ideas about a
supreme being.
      The negative approach has never been the predominant trend in the
Abrahamic religions, although it has more prominence in Eastern Orthodox
Christianity. Even Muslims, who stress the unknowability of God to all but
prophets and mystics, do not emphasize this approach. Theists always
attribute positive features to God. In Christianity, in the beginning was the
word (logos) (John 1:1), not silence. Theologians try to tame the via
negativa by treating it as only a supplement to the positive approach.
Mystics, however, see the negative way as a corrective to any positive
depictions of a transcendent reality since all attributions must of necessity
come from the phenomenal realm. This approach does not merely affirm
that there is more to a transcendent reality than is known but affirms its
absolute otherness from all things natural. Positive characterizations may
direct our attention away from other objects, but this still makes a
transcendent reality into one object among objects. The second step—the
negation of all positive characterizations—corrects that and directs our
attention away from all objects and toward transcendence.