Do Natural Triggers Produce Mystical Experiences?
Consider further the “multiple realization” problem and its inverse. Not
everyone who meditates or ingests a drug undergoes a change in
consciousness even when they have physiological changes. Meditative
practitioners well along the path to enlightenment may have the same
physiological reactions as beginners, but they still may have very different
subjective experiences. Conversely, it may be that enlightened states
produce only very subtle differences or no differences at all in physiological
reactions than do unenlightened states in advanced meditators. In sum,
meditators, including those within the same religious tradition, may be
undergoing different experiences when their physiology registers the same
state. Also consider the inverse of the multiple-realization problem: in one
study, Buddhist monks and Franciscan nuns exhibit similar changes in the
brain, but the Buddhist monks experienced selflessness while the Christian
nuns experienced “a tangible sense of the closeness of God and a mingling
with Him” (d’Aquili & Newberg 2002: 7). This suggests that the
introvertive experiences were different (one an “empty” depth-mystical
experience and one a differentiated theistic one), but that they had the same
physiological bases and effects—if so, a duplication of these bases would
not guarantee duplicating one subjective experience. The opposite of this
problem also cannot be ruled out in advance of actual study (if possible):
meditators may undergo similar subjective reactions while having different
physiological reactions. That different meditative techniques can lead to the
same effect should also be noted, e.g., sensory overload and sensory
deprivation apparently both lead to hyperactivity in the limbic system.
      Thus, scientists may be able to trigger changes in brain states or other
physiological changes, but it is not obvious that they can produce a given
experience or subjective state.26 So too, meditation may rewire the brain’s
neural system (Austin 1998), but mystical experiences may be a different
type of event. There is also the related issue of whether all of the
experiences induced by drugs or another artificial stimulation are in fact the
same as those cultivated by meditation or those occurring spontaneously.
(Again, for theological reasons, theists will want to claim that the
phenomenal content of true mystical experiences is different.) The artificial
production of a mystical experience may duplicate the chemical reactions of
a mystical experience but not the “subjective” experience. Drug-induced
experiences may also have less of a long-term impact on a person’s
physiology than do experiences resulting from cultivation on a path. May at
least some of the experiences differ in nature too? It may be that
experiences produced by artificial stimulation do not duplicate all the
features of spontaneous or meditation-cultivated mystical experiences but
only their biological features—i.e., the stimulation may indeed activate the
areas of the brain involved in genuine mystical experiences, but there may
still be more to the subjective side of these experiences than is enabled by
the laboratory procedures. There is also the very real issue of whether a
laboratory setting affects the subjective side of the experience since “set and
setting” matter. In sum, scientists may in fact not be duplicating the full
phenomenology of any mystical experience. Or it may be that some people
who have the artificial stimulation administered to them do indeed have
genuine mystical experiences and other people do not. That is, perhaps
some experiences are triggered that are not similar to genuine mystical
experiences but are in fact genuine mystical experiences. However, other
types of experiences may also be triggered.
      At a minimum, more is involved in a mystical experience than merely
brain activity being altered. Drugs may produce some of the necessary
conditions for a mystical experience to occur by altering the brain’s
chemistry, but they may not provide all of the necessary and sufficient
conditions. If that is the case, as the psychologist Ralph Hood notes, it
would be naive to claim that mystical experiences are drug-specific effects
(2005: 354). That is, drugs would not cause the experiences. Hood
concludes that the weight of evidence is that drugs elicit brain states that
permit religious awareness but do not necessitate it (1995: 584). At most,
ingesting the drugs sets up the conditions enabling or permitting the
experience to occur by disrupting the conditions for ordinary experiences,
or however the chemicals in the brain do what they do. And once the
experience is learned, the drug may no longer be necessary to set the
conditions. But the ingestion of a drug cannot guarantee a mystical
experience, even if it is administered in a conducive setting to a person
actively seeking mystical experiences. Neither drugs nor anything else so
far can produce the experience on demand. Thus, a drug or electrical
stimulation of part of the brain is not a deterministic trigger of such
experiences.