Will Any Actions Do?
Critics of the possibility of mystics being moral, however, point to another
sense of the phrase “beyond good and evil.” They may concede that the
enlightened have no personal will, and thus the thought of acting for
personal gain could not enter their minds, but they point out that the
enlightened need not adopt moral values. They can point to Arjuna’s
enlightened action in the Bhagavad-gita—the killing in a war that looks
exactly like unenlightened killing, except that it may be more effortless and
efficient since the enlightened are now free of doubt, hesitancy, or
indecisiveness. Thus, mysticism can be consistent with participating in a
war: the inner attitude is all that matters to the mystics, not the actions
themselves, and so any acts will do. No act is per se bad. The natural
response is the immoral action of the libertines and antinomians who claim
that ultimate reality, in either a theistic or nontheistic form, is beyond the
attributes of our realm and thus is beyond good and evil; therefore, they too
are beyond good and evil and so can adopt any action in this realm, no
matter what its consequences are to others. No ethical injunctions can apply
to the liberated life, and the enlightened may casually violate moral
standards or be indifferent to the suffering of others. What a character does
in a “dream” is inconsequential, and so no actions matter in this “dream”
realm. All values from this point of view are merely conventions with no
grounding in reality. Thus, mystics are “beyond good and evil” in a value-
sense—even if they happen to choose to follow rules—since they can do
anything.
      However, one can ask how a truly selfless person could lead a life of
genuine license—a life driven by hedonistic impulses—especially after
years of austere mystical training. The medieval Christian Free Spirits were
considered libertine and antinomian; they considered themselves free from
virtues and from church or secular authorities, letting their bodies do
whatever nature dictated and attributing everything that happened to God.
But being beyond the rules was considered acceptable only for the
enlightened, and how selfish could even the enlightened’s natural impulses
be after years of discipline? And now much truly immoral conduct the Free
Spirits actually engaged in is debated by historians.
      This objection, however, does highlight the fact discussed above that
mystical experiences carry no moral values and thus that mystics must
adopt other-regardingness from other sources if they are to be moral. This
also points to another issue: is the ground of reality in some sense moral, or
are moral values simply a matter of our realm? As discussed in chapter 6,
transcendent realities are ontologically “wholly other,” but they can share
properties with worldly phenomena. In short, there is a complete
incommensurability only between ontic natures or modes of existence, not
necessarily on the matter of attributes. If a transcendent source were in fact
ineffable, it could not be of any significance to our lives—it could not be
the source of values or beliefs and could not offer any guidance because it
would have no known properties. But as discussed, such absolute
ineffability can be rejected: mystics do claim to retain something from their
experiences. To the moral theistic mystic, a caring, nurturing love or
absolute goodness appears as an attribute of the reality enveloping our
world. For the Muslim Jalal al-Din Rumi, love is the astrolabe of the
transcendent. In the extrovertive “cosmic consciousness” of Richard M.
Bucke, this world is not composed of dead matter governed by unconscious
laws but is a living presence whose foundation is love (1969: 17–18).
      But those extrovertive mystics who take the whole of this realm to be
the sum total of reality can claim that reality just is and is not morally
“good” or “evil”—all value-judgments represent the points of view of
fragments of the whole (what is good or bad for them), and such judgments
cannot apply to the whole. From the point of view of reality, the only thing
actually “evil” is the human evil of acting selfishly and thus going against
the grain of reality. If we saw reality as it truly is, we would have no sense
of self and thus would not act selfishly. All of reality is in fact one
interlocking whole; all the parts are real and hence “good.” Within the
whole, no parts can be separated and labeled “good” or “bad.” What
appears as “evil” to us only represents our limited, self-centered point of
view. “Natural disasters” are simply the same forces at work in nature that
made us in the first place. The bubonic plague from our point of view is
something horrendous that we should eradicate, but from the point of view
of the bacteria it was just a matter of natural thriving. From the point of
view of the whole, neither perspective has any priority. Hence, labeling any
phenomenon but self-will “evil” is ultimately a matter of our own
ignorance. (And if one accepts that the “selfish gene” alone is propelling
evolution, then even self-will is not evil but in keeping with nature.) There
are no fixed values to reality—all values reflect self-centered points of
view. As Tantrikas would say, the energy that is nature is indifferent—we
make up the values. Pleasure and pain just are; they are not “good” or
“bad.” Our sense of moral “good and evil” is just another duality we have to
overcome to see reality as it truly is. No one is to be judged or condemned
because all are equal manifestations of a transcendent reality. If we must
make a value judgment, we should accept whatever happens as “good” (if
we value this realm) or as illusion or suffering (if we do not value this
realm). But either way is arbitrary since reality is value-neutral.
      Daoism is one extrovertive mystical tradition that many scholars argue
cannot be moral since the values of the Daoist Way are nonmoral. That is,
the Way’s impartiality means total indifference, and thus Daoists must reject
other-regardingness altogether. Any interactions with nature or people will
suffice. Any occupation will do. The Way operates as well in a robber as in
anyone (Zhuangzi 29). The enlightened are, as Robert Eno says, just as
likely to carve up people as oxen—as the samurai so well illustrated (1996:
142).18 (The role of Zen monks in training soldiers and supporting Japanese
war efforts in World War II also could be cited here [see Victoria 1997,
2003].19) Thus, moral quietism and indifference are the only attitudes
compatible with their way of life (see Graham 1981). In the words of
Herrlee Creel: “Morally, Taoist philosophy is completely indifferent. All
things are relative. ‘Right’ and ‘wrong’ are just words which we may apply
to the same thing, depending upon which partial viewpoint we see it
from. … From the transcendent standpoint of the tao all such things are
irrelevant” (1970: 3–4).20 Thus, an enlightened Daoist on a whim “might
destroy a city and massacre its inhabitants with the concentrated fury of a
typhoon, and feel no more qualms of conscience than the majestic sun that
shines on the scene of desolation after the storm. After all, both life and
death, begetting and destruction, are parts of the harmonious order of the
universe, which is good because it exists and because it is itself” (1953:
112).
      However, this position fails because it omits the fact that other-
regarding values are ascribed to the Way: compassion (ci) (Daodejing 8, 31,
67) or great humaneness (ren) (Zhuangzi 2, 12). The Way naturally gives
itself, sustaining everything like a mother (Daodejing 3, 25, 34). It is like
water, nourishing all and not competing (ibid.: 8). The Way of
heaven/nature is to benefit others, not to injure them (ibid.: 81). Its
impartiality is not indifference but an evenness that is beneficial to all.
Assertive actions are not in conformity with the Way, but the Way does not
judge. It benefits good and bad people alike (ibid.: 62). Thus, the Way is
impartially beneficial to all, and so the sage, who reflects the actions of the
Way, is also impartially beneficial to all. As the enlightened wander free
and at ease through the world, they will be naturally compassionate or
humane, free of the confines of concepts or of the need to follow rules.
They will assist in the spontaneous self-becoming (ziran) of all beings
through non-self-assertive action (wuwei). In addition, they follow the Way
out of an other-regarding concern (see Jones 2004: 251–53). Thus, there is
no reason to believe that the harmful acts that Eno and Creel think could
follow from Daoist values would not in fact be seen by Laozi and Zhuangzi
as out of keeping with the Way. Nothing in the texts suggests a license to be
immoral. The nonassertive yin-actions of “holding to the root” are,
according to them, always the correct course of action, balancing the
normal yang-actions of others. Once the enlightened are performing
nonassertive and noncoercive actions, how could they even form the notion
of butchering people or of destroying a city (unless it somehow would
benefit others more)? The compassion or great humaneness of the Way
would prevail.
     More generally, extrovertive mystics can be moral if reality is deemed
moral. Any transcendent source can be called “good” in a nonmoral sense
in that it supplies our reality—i.e., it is good for us that it exists or else we
would not. Thus, it is intrinsically valuable to us. But moral goodness does
not necessarily follow: if a god created us just to watch us suffer, it is
certainly not morally good. No mystical tradition considers a transcendent
source evil. Indeed, both introvertive and extrovertive mystics often have a
sense that there is a fundamental rightness to things at the deepest level. But
seeing God in everything can lead mystics to moral indifference or
antinomian actions: everything shares the same being of God and so is
innately good and free of evil as is; or everything is the creation of a
perfect, compassionate god, and so everything is perfect the way things are,
and there is no need to change anything, or indeed any right to change
anything. Thus, free of a sense of self-will, we can do whatever our body
desires, since our body too is just part of perfect nature. So too, nontheistic
mystics may experience an “intrinsic rightness” or “ultimate perfection” to
everything as is, leaving nothing more to do and nothing to fear (Austin
1998: 537–38). This may also lead theistic mystics who have an
overwhelming sense of a loving source to deny that evil is real: everything
is benign or even perfect as is. Enlightenment may not make one more
sensitive to suffering—Ram Dass tells of walking in Bangladesh with his
teacher among scenes of horrific suffering, and his guru kept saying “Can
you see how perfect it is?” (in Smith 2001: 254).21 So why would any
particular action matter? Either no particular action matters or all actions
matter equally, whether moral or not. No actions are prohibited. Meister
Eckhart stressed the matter of self-will in action, not the act itself: he said
that if the pope were slain by his hand but not by his will, he would go to
the alter and say mass as usual (2009: 94). This can also lead to fatalism:
whatever happens is God’s will, and so whatever we do is by definition
God’s will (ibid.: 240)—there is no point in praying “thy will be done on
earth as in heaven” because no matter what occurs it is God’s will.22 So too,
some Hasidic Jews believed that we cannot not do God’s will—even the
wicked obey him. Suffering and death do not matter, if they are deemed real
at all, since they do not affect what is eternal and transcendent.
      And as noted above, natural suffering is hard to reconcile with the idea
that the ground of reality is loving and compassionate. Nature is not all
sunshine and flowers—it is also tornadoes, earthquakes, hurricanes, and
floods. Sentient beings have been suffering for countless eons during
evolution simply by existing—e.g., dying of starvation or from attacks by
other animals. This is nature as it is, independent of our concepts and our
unenlightened self-centered point of view. To mystics, such suffering may
be irrelevant or even unreal, since events in time are irrelevant to the
timeless reality. But how can theistic mystics argue that self-giving love is
the ground underlying the world and that this energy is released in them by
giving up a sense of self? Does this mean that any sense of unbounded love
that is part of some theistic mystical experiences is in fact no more than
simply feeling connected to all that exists rather than an indication of the
nature of the source of the world? Do moral mystics love others despite the
indifference of the ground of being simply because the sense of joy from
the experiences is combined with moral values internalized from their
religious tradition? Meister Eckhart claimed that God suffers along with us,
but this suffering is so joyful for God that for God it is not suffering at all
but joyful (2009: 547). This may make God’s joy immutable, but does this
also mean that any sense of love in mysticism is no more than simply a
subjective feeling projected from the experiencer? Can this lead to an
insensitivity to the suffering of others or treating evil as meaningless? In
any case, the mystery of natural suffering only becomes more impenetrable
with the mystical sense of joy.
      But this returns moral mystics to a basic problem: how to ground their
moral ways of life in a transcendent reality when it is not clear that that
reality is moral. Even if they argue that the transcendent is only
ontologically “wholly other” and can share some properties with natural
phenomena such as values, they still have a dilemma: a loving god is not
reflected in nature—based on nature, God appears to be morally indifferent.
Thus, theistic moral mystics still have to get to other-regardingness on
grounds that do not include mystical experiences themselves.