The positions defended here are these:

         •There appear to be genuine mystical experiences, i.e.,
         experiences associated with neurological events that are distinct
         from those associated with other experiences.
         •There appear to be mystical experiences that are empty of all
         differentiated content.
         •If there are transcendent realities and introvertive mystics
         experience them, the postexperience understanding of the nature
         of such realities depends in large part on the doctrines of a
         mystic’s tradition, with input from the experiences themselves;
         thus, all mystical knowledge-claims involve more than what is
         experienced.
         •We are not in a position to determine if mystical experiences are
         cognitive or, if they are, to determine which extrovertive and
         introvertive mystical doctrines are best.
         •Mystics can rationally treat their experiences as evidence of
         some transcendent realities, but they cannot transfer any
         experienced sense of certainty to their tradition’s doctrines on the
         nature of such realities, since equally qualified mystics produce
         genuinely conflicting doctrines, and thus the degree of rationality
         is lower for holding any tradition’s doctrines.
          •Mystical experiences, like all experiences, are grounded in the
          brain, but this alone is not reason to discredit mystics’ cognitive
          claims, and so the science of the brain events is not grounds by
          itself for a natural reduction of these experiences.
          •Mystics do not produce one generic “mystical metaphysics,” and
          mystics are not in a unique position to determine which
          metaphysical doctrines, if any, are correct.
          •Mystical discourse can be coherent, and nonmystics can
          understand it to a degree.
          •Mystics can be rational in their arguments.
          •Mysticism and science are different endeavors approaching
          different aspects of reality, and scientific methods cannot test or
          support mystical claims or vice versa.
          •Mystics’ values and ethics come from outside mystical
          experiences, but mystical experiences can affect how beliefs and
          values are seen and applied.

      With this lack of certainty on any mystical matter, it may seem that
mysticism has little to offer our understanding of the world or our values
today. However, the possibility that mystics experience aspects of reality
that nonmystics do not cannot be ignored. In addition, depth-mystical
experiences may be a pure consciousness—i.e., in that state, the light of
consciousness is on but not illuminating anything. If so, this will affect our
view of the nature of consciousness even if no transcendent reality is
involved, and that could affect the study of the mind. If the mystics’ claim
that there is no phenomenal ego is correct, this too would have important
implications for what we take to be real. The possibility of an experiential
grounding of the religious notions of transcendent realities similarly is
important for philosophers and theologians alike to consider, even if we
cannot determine the nature of such purported realities. The extreme of
mystical selflessness and its implementation in different mystical traditions
can expose our underlying values and beliefs. Thus, the study of the
mystical beliefs and values of different cultures can expose hidden
assumptions of our own beliefs and widen our perspective on possible
options. All of this makes studying mysticism interesting and important to
understanding our situation in the world today.