Scientific Study Versus Mystical Practices
Scientists studying meditators are doing science, not engaging in a mystical
practice. This may seem obvious, but the point is often overlooked. Getting
readings on monks during meditation does not make this science mystical.
Conversely, mystics do not “observe” their consciousness for scientific
purposes. The mental training of meditation is designed to familiarize the
practitioner with specific types of mental processes (Brefczynski et al.
2007: 11,483). Meditators are trying to calm their mind to attain God or
some other such end. Over the centuries Buddhists have developed precise
descriptions and a classification of the mental states relevant to their
practices and goal of selflessness, not out of a scientific interest in how the
mind/brain works, but to aid in taming the mind. The Buddhist
Abhidarmists’ taxonomy of mental states is not part of a “2,500-year
research program in phenomenological psychology” (contra Flanagan 2011:
81) but only related to relevant states for ending suffering. Nor have
Buddhists been pursuing the “scientific study of consciousness” for two-
and-a-half millennia (contra Beauregard & O’Leary 2007: 256). Even the
Yogacharins, the Mahayanists who most concentrated on the analysis of the
mind, did not conduct a general scientific survey; their phenomenology of
experiences focused on such questions as how the mental construction of
“objects” arises from the transforming of consciousness. As the Dalai Lama
says, the purpose of Buddhist psychology is not to catalog the mind’s
makeup or to describe mental functioning but to overcome suffering and
clear away mental afflictions (2005: 165–66). So too, the analysis of states
of mind in the Hindu Yoga Sutras is related only to how to control them and
end “mental activities.” Meditators may permit scientists to scan their
brains while they meditate, but it is not as if they want to develop a new
neuroscientific theory. They witness events in their own mind as if from a
third-person point of view, but not out of a disinterested desire to learn how
the brain works: they are interested in attaining the knowledge necessary to
align their lives with reality. Buddhists have not been studying the problem
of the relation of mind to matter for ages and have not been developing new
hypotheses on that issue (contra Wallace & Hodel 2008: xviii)—they have
been focusing on attaining an insight to end their suffering and not studying
the relation of the mind to the brain at all. (It is not at all clear how
meditation can shed light on the relationship of “mind” to “matter” since
whether mystical experiences are products of the brain alone, as naturalists
claim, or involve something more, they would still be the same
phenomenologically. Thus, it is not obvious how attaining new states of
mind through meditation will help us understand the mind/body relation.)
And putting the word “experiments” in quotation marks when discussing
meditation (ibid.: 142) does not make the meditators’ observation of their
mental states as they attempt to calm their mind into scientific experiments.
     It should also be noted that in the Buddhists’ mindfulness type of
enlightenment, the enlightening insight occurs outside of the “lucid trances”
(dhyanas) related to concentrative meditation, although the mind is
prepared by such concentrative exercises. Similarly, the enlightened state of
Shankara’s Advaita Vedanta is not a continuous depth-mystical experience
but a state of consciousness that is outside of that experience: in the
enlightened state, sense-experience remains (perhaps now in a mindful
mode), and the insight is knowing the world’s true status as illusory.1 The
mystics’ interest is in the insight into the nature of reality in order to align
themselves with it, not in any unusual experiences, and whether these
insights can be tied to specific states of mind or body is irrelevant to
practicing their religious ways of life and their ultimate concerns.
      José Cabezón reports that there is “widespread skepticism” among
meditating Buddhist monks regarding the value of neuroscientific studies of
meditative states and the long-term effects of meditative practice (2003:
42). From the point of view of mystical practice, such skepticism is
justified. Meditation is part of an encompassing mystical way of life leading
toward enlightenment, and any biological mechanisms enabling mystical
experiences to occur are simply irrelevant to those participating in such
ways of life. It is as irrelevant to mystics as the mechanisms enabling visual
observations are to physicists. Rather, the permanent transformation of a
person to a state in accord with reality is central to mysticism, not any
changes in brain events that may or may not accompany such a
transformation.2
      In short, not all introspection is for a scientific purpose: the mystical
objective is a spiritual enlightenment regardless of the findings of how the
brain or mind works. Of course, what meditators report or what scientists
find studying meditators may benefit neuroscience—meditators may have
discovered states of consciousness or other aspects of the mind that are not
known to modern neuroscientists. But this is not why the practitioners are
engaged in meditation. Nevertheless, whether the scientific study of persons
undergoing mystical experiences is relevant to the cognitive status of
mystical knowledge-claims is a legitimate issue.