And Yet Mystics Continue to Talk
But again, the copious writings of mystics from around the world indicate
that enlightened mystics do continue to speak. If talking about transcendent
realities or the phenomenal realm as it really is distorts their nature, why
speak at all? Because of the importance mystics attach to their insights. But
how can mystics speak at all about what they experience? Because after
introvertive mystical experiences and even during extrovertive mystical
experiences, they sense diversity. That is, the enlightened state is not an
undifferentiated awareness, and in that state it is possible to use language.
But when introvertive mystics are in even mindful states of consciousness
with differentiated content, their minds make transcendent realities into
objects. Plotinus spoke of afterward seeing an “image” of what is
experienced, but he makes it clear that this seeing (which must involve
duality) is distinct from being “oned” (Enneads 6.9.11). Such images, like
all images, are necessarily objectified: some mental distance exists between
the perceiver and the perceived. But transcendent realities are wholly other
than any objectified conception and hence are unimaginable. Thus, the
“One” cannot be grasped by any thought (ibid.: 5.5.6, 6.9.6).
      Nevertheless, they succeed only if mystical cognitive utterances can
refer to transcendent realities and the phenomenal realm as it really is
without distorting their ontic status. But this is possible: we can reject the
mirror theory of language without rejecting language. And this appears to
be what mystics implicitly do in practice, even if they do not realize it. To
cite the Theravada canon, the enlightened can make use of current forms of
speech without “clinging” to them or being led astray by them (Majjhima
Nikaya 1.500, Digha Nikaya 1.195). Thus, the Buddha could use “I” (aham)
and first-person verbs without believing in a separate and real self—“I” is
merely a useful shorthand for one constantly changing bundle of aggregates
in the flux of phenomena. The prime illustration in the Theravada tradition
is the word “chariot” for the temporary and changing parts assembled into a
working chariot (Milindapanha 2.1.1). In the Prajnaparamita tradition,
bodhisattvas too can use language, although the results are sometimes
strange. For example, Subhuti can say, “I am the one whom the Buddha has
indicated as the foremost of those who dwell free of strife and greed [i.e., an
Arhat]. And yet it does not occur to me ‘I am an Arhat, freed of greed’ ”
(Diamond-Cutter Sutra 9). That is, Subhuti could accept the description of
himself as “an Arhat” and say the words “I am an Arhat,” but he does not
see this as indicating a distinct, self-existent entity. Denotative words and
statements are now taken not to refer to permanent objects but to fairly
stable configurations in the flux of phenomena that we group together for
attention. These “conventional designations” can still indicate what is
“conventionally real,” although from the point of view of the highest
concern (paramarthatas) the conventional is ultimately empty of
permanence and thus is not real. That is, Buddhists affirm that there are
denotable factors of the phenomenal world (dharmas)—dharmas simply
lack the independence of being self-existent.
      In short, what has been implicitly rejected is only the mirror theory of
how language works, not language itself. That is, using language does not
itself entail any ontic commitments—only a theory of the nature of
language does—and we can reject the theory and still utilize language.
Thus, the word “God” can be a grammatical object even though theists do
not treat God as a phenomenal object or as a transcendent object set against
the phenomenal world. But this means that how the enlightened view
concepts has changed. They see language about the phenomenal world as
useful for negotiating the world and for leading others toward
enlightenment even if there are no permanent referents for nouns in the
ultimate makeup of reality. (And since the enlightened do speak, we cannot
dismiss all mystical statements as products of ignorance and therefore false.
This also means that the enlightened should have no problem talking to
each other.) This is possible since there are configurations in the flux even
if they are only temporary: buildings may only be impermanent
assemblages, consisting of equally impermanent parts and not “entities”
unto themselves—and thus are not “real” in that specific sense—but the
word “building” is still useful for directing attention to parts of the present
flux of reality as we move through the world. Buildings do not exist in a
way different than how Santa Claus does not exist—there is some reality
there even if the reality is constantly changing and thus there is no
permanent referent for any term. Different languages make different
distinctions, but all languages must make distinctions and categorize things.
Thus, there is no reason for mystics to try to invent a new language since all
languages present the same basic problem of dividing the indivisible and
labeling transcendent realities as things. Mystics can simply employ the
language of their own culture; their only change may be to use the passive
voice more than the active one. But the enlightened now use language
without projecting the linguistic distinctions onto reality and creating a false
ontology of unreal distinct “entities.”8


                                An Analogy
We can see the introvertive mystics’ dilemma by means of an analogy that
parallels the situation in one important respect. Imagine beings who
experience the world only in two dimensions. Now imagine claiming to
them that three-dimensional objects exist. They cannot form mental images
of three-dimensional objects any more than we can form images of four-
dimensional objects. Perhaps some of them will accept the possibility of
such objects even if they cannot picture one, just as we can accept the
existence of colorless objects such as atoms even though we cannot picture
them without adding a color. Now consider drawing the two-dimensional
Necker stick drawing of a cube for these beings, and the problem of trying
to explain it to them.