An Analogy
As an analogy, consider this book. The letters, numbers, punctuation, and
spaces are the smallest elements of the work, and the rules of grammar for
forming the words and sentences are a component distinct from such
elements. Scientists are like grammarians identifying the universe’s laws
(its rules of grammar) and the fundamental building blocks (its words and
elements). However, as grammarians, scientists are not interested in the
nature of the substance embodying the parts—the “ink” that embodies the
“letters.” What gives substance to the universe does not matter to scientists
any more than the material that this book is produced in (ink and paper,
electronic versions) matters to its informational content. That is, only the
informational content of the text counts in science, and this is independent
of the medium in which it is embodied. Physicists and chemists are not
interested in the “narrative of the story”—the history of the universe—but
only in the grammar, words, and elements utilized in the narrative.
Geologists, biologists, astronomers, and cosmologists do deal with this
historical dimension, but they are no more interested in the “beingness” of
the medium in which the story is embodied than are physicists and
chemists. In short, what scientists study in a “text” is not found by
analyzing the ink and paper.
      To bring mysticism into the analogy: extrovertive mystical experiences
are a matter of experiencing the ink and paper apart from the formed letters,
the rules of grammar, and the message of the text. That is, the experiences
involve the beingness of the letters and the background paper, which is
irrelevant to the information that the scientists study. (The analogy breaks
down, since obviously science in the real world can also study the ink and
paper or any other medium—any material remains differentiated within the
world. This shows how difficult it is to make any analogies from our
dualistic world about something as basic as the beingness common to
everything.)
      In sum, mystical experiences involve a different type of knowledge
than does science: we cannot get information about the medium of
embodiment from the information contained in the words of the text or vice
versa. Thus, no empirical findings or theories in science could rule out the
possibility that mystical experiences may be knowledge-giving of an aspect
of reality that scientists qua scientists ignore. Conversely, mystical
experiences of beingness are equally irrelevant to scientific theories of the
components and structures of nature.
                          Beingness and Science
So what is “beingness”? It is “existence in general,” to use a not-too-helpful
characterization. Even if there is something within the natural universe that
gives particles their mass (e.g., a Higgs field), we still have to ask what
gives that thing its being. Any further characterization of the “is-ness” of
reality—being-as-such—is difficult. The question “what is reality?” has
been a part of Western metaphysics since Parmenides, but it remains just as
big a mystery today. The philosopher Milton Munitz asks whether we can
even speak of beingness since it is not an object or set of objects (1965,
1986, 1990). Beingness, Munitz notes, “shines through” the known universe
but is not identical with it, and hence we are aware of it—as with “the
mystical” of Ludwig Wittgenstein’s mirror-theory-inspired Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus (6.522), beingness manifests itself. But beingness
never presents itself to us as a phenomenon (i.e., as an object set off from
the observing subject), and so it is unutterable and incapable of being
conveyed in language since it is not conceptualizable as an object. Thus, the
proper response to our awareness of beingness is silence (Munitz 1986:
278). That is, the very beingness of the world cannot be “captured” by any
language, and thus we are left with only mystery. Nor is beingness an entity
of any type: it is not a thing or combination of things or the totality of
things. Unlike an object, it is not “conceptually bound.” It has no properties,
qualities, or structures to discover—it has nothing to describe. It is utterly
unique in that it is not an instance of any category whatsoever. Thus,
“beingness in itself” is unintelligible, since intelligibility requires the
applicability of descriptive or explanatory concepts (ibid.: 274). That is,
intelligibility relates to what something is or how it is, not to the underlying
that-ness of reality. We live in a world of differentiated objects and see and
speak only of those objects. Beingness itself remains beneath any
conceptual map we could apply to the world to create order. Once we start
speaking of beingness—or even just naming it—we make it one object
among objects, which “it” is not. That is, we see trees and buildings, not
beingness, and we cannot formulate propositions about it. (Note that
Munitz’s points are based on philosophical analysis alone, not on mystical
experiences, and presuppose the mirror theory of language.)
      If Munitz’s position is correct, any explanations or understanding of
the beingness of our world would be foreclosed. But the important point
here is only that beingness cannot be studied scientifically since it is
common to everything: because it is structureless, we cannot put it to any
tests to see how it works. Treating the metaphysical beingness that keeps us
from lapsing into nonexistence as a form of natural energy (as Adolph
Grünbaum does [1996]) only leads to a problem: energy needs the
metaphysical power of beingness as much as anything else. So too, classical
mystical metaphysics may emphasize, as in Neoplatonism, the emanation of
the phenomenal realm to explain the relation of “being” to the realm of
“becoming,” or it may emphasize the ontic interconnection of things, but it
never emphasized the efficient causal connections of things within the
natural world.8 Any transcendent source of the universe is not shooting
natural energy into the world from another realm. The metaphysical power
of beingness may be constant or vary whether a law of conservation applies
to natural matter/energy or not. Scientists’ findings will always be about
features within the natural realm and cannot in principle affect the issue of
the ontic status of this realm as a whole.9 (But this does not mean that one
who is scientifically minded can deny beingness—the laws of nature must
be embodied in something.)