Silence
There are four responses mystics can make to their dilemma with language.
Two involve adhering to the mirror theory (silence and negation of all
characteristics), one implicitly rejects it (positive characterizations), and
one combines the two (paradox). Paradox will be discussed in the next
chapter.
     If the mirror theory were strictly adhered to, the result for introvertive
mystics should be silence about mystical realities.11 But the silence of
mystics is the opposite of the silence of skeptics: it is based on knowing
something that cannot be expressed adequately. Plotinus claimed that all
predicates must be denied: even “the One” does not apply to what is
transcendent since “one” is a number among numbers, and thus it may
suggest some duality; silence is ultimately the only proper response
(Enneads 5.3.12, 5.5.6, 6.7.38.4–5). As already noted, even “is” would not
be applicable to transcendent realities or the phenomenal realm as it really
is since phenomenal objects are. So too, vice versa: if only the alleged
transcendent reality is deemed real, we cannot say that worldly phenomena
exist. In Buddhism, only reality as it truly is (tattva) is real, and so the
differentiated phenomena of the world cannot be said to “exist.” So too with
Advaita for Brahman and the “dream” realm.
      Mystical silence is not merely not speaking but also inner silence—i.e.,
not even any thoughts about the transcendent. No words seem applicable.
Treating “the Way” or “the One” or “Brahman” as names does not solve the
problem. Plotinus tells us that it is precisely because the One is not an entity
that “strictly speaking, no name suits it” (Enneads 6.9.5). (To the
Neoplatonist Plotinus, names are like Platonic “forms” rather than simply
conventional labels we apply to things.) Indeed, Eckhart said that by not
being named, we named God (2009: 219). According to Shankara, the idea
of Brahman as an entity is superimposed (adhyasa) on the name “Brahman”
(Brahma-sutra-bhashya 3.3.9). Laozi’s distinction between a “private
name” (ming) and a “public name” (zi) (Daodejing 25)—i.e., “the Way” is
used only in the first sense since there is no public name for it—does not
get around the problem: private names still mark off an object.12 Similarly,
even if Nagarjuna is referring to “dependent-arising” (pratitya-samutpada)
as merely a “designation” (prajnaptir) (Mula-madhyamaka-karikas 24.18),
this does not help. Neither does treating “God” as merely a placeholder for
the mystery experienced in theistic experiences. In short, language appears
under the mirror theory to be a Procrustean bed, and so what is experienced
is declared ineffable.
      Shankara quotes from a now unknown Upanishad the case of Bahva,
who when asked to explain the self said “Learn Brahman, friend” and fell
silent. When the student persisted, Bahva finally declared: “I am teaching
you, but you do not understand: silence is the self” (Brahma-sutra-bhashya
3.2.17). Here silence itself becomes the thing known, not merely a part of
the meditative techniques to attain mystical experiences: the inner silence
does not merely reflect the mystic’s mental state resulting from stopping the
noise of the discursive mind, but indicates the nature of a transcendent
reality. Brahman is silent, as Eckhart also says of the transcendent ground
(McGinn 2001: 46). And by Bahva speaking of silence in this way, the
problem with language is reintroduced. Also notice that Bahva did not
remain silent for long. Silence here is a teaching technique, and teachers
seldom end up taking a vow of silence. The same is shown by the tale
known as the first Zen story of the Buddha silently holding up a flower and
only Kashyapa understanding. The Buddha too did not remain silent but
extensively taught verbally. The Buddha was called “the silent one of the
Shakya clan” (shakya-muni), but this referred only to his training on the
path; in the enlightened state, he was “silent” only in the technical sense
(following the mirror theory) that words are not real and thus he did not
utter a “real” sound when he spoke. This also means, as Madhyamikas
emphasize, that there is nothing real (sat) to teach and that the
Madhyamikas advance no theses (pratijnas) (e.g., Mula-madhyamaka-
karikas 25.24) since nothing is self-existent.
      Silence protects both the experiences themselves and the reality
experienced. But it is hard to remain silent about something that mystics
consider fundamentally important. In Jalal al-din Rumi’s words, “There is
no way to say this, … and no place to stop saying it.” Indeed, claiming that
one must be silent only enhances the otherness and importance of an
alleged transcendent reality. Moreover, our analytical mind’s innate
tendency to conceptualize takes over after introvertive mystical
experiences. Both mystics themselves and the unenlightened want to know
what the mystics are being silent about. Hence the paradox of ineffability:
in order to claim that a transcendent reality is beyond all names, we must
name it. Merely saying that there is something “transconceptual” is not
itself to form a conception of anything, but in our unenlightened state we
will form a mental object for thinking about “it.”