Mysticism and the Question of Universal Reason
Nothing examined here suggests that cultivating or undergoing mystical
experiences causes a person to be irrational or that mystics have a unique
logic of their own. For the issue of rationality, there is nothing unique about
mystics’ reasoning. Rather, mystical texts appear to be logical by ordinary
Western standards.29 Mystical systems of belief are sometimes quite
complex; their premises may be unacceptable to the scientifically minded
and may also mix factual and evaluative elements; the systems are
grounded in experiences that we may not take to be cognitively supreme;
what is taken to be evidence and the standards of evidence may differ;
mystics’ concerns may not be ours; and mystics may in general weigh
different cognitive considerations differently than modern Westerners do.
But none of this makes mystics’ thoughts irrational. From what was shown
here, how mystics handle the different elements within their frameworks is
not necessarily irrational or illogical. Thus, mystics cannot be condemned
as necessarily irrational or obscurantists in this regard. Nor can they be
condemned as irrational or anti-intellectual for arguing that ideas cannot
replace the need for experience. This is true for everyday life and science—
that nonordinary states of consciousness and alleged realities are involved
only highlights the matter for mystics.30
     Nevertheless, philosophers typically argue that mystics must in the end
reject logic and reasoning. True, the act of reasoning (which necessarily
involves differentiated ideas) is incompatible with having at least
introvertive mystical experiences at the same time, and mystical
experiences and enlightenment are not the result of reasoning or a
reasoning-produced intuition. But after the experiences, distinctions are
present in the mind, and thus the opportunity arises in that state to be either
logical or illogical in the arguments one makes. And mystics can
consistently claim that reasoning must be part of enlightened ways of life to
establish the correct understanding of what was experienced. Mysticism is
broader than only having mystical experiences—it is about how one lives
one’s life—and thus reasoning can be a part of mysticism. Advancing
arguments to establish the superiority of one particular mystical
interpretation would then not be inconsistent with being a mystic. Meister
Eckhart, standing in the medieval scholastic tradition, can agree that reason
can find proofs of the truths revealed in Christian scriptures while still
maintaining that God dwells beyond the limits of the mind (1981: 27–28,
31). In Buddhism, reasoning (tarka) is rejected as a means to
enlightenment, but Buddhists do produce arguments. In general, mystics do
make arguments that are logical in structure. Their problems of
understanding in worldly terms what was experienced and a soteriological
concern for the unenlightened may lead mystics to speak paradoxically, but
the contradictions occurring in paradoxes can be explained away.
      Since mystics are considered exemplars of irrationality, if mystical
works can be shown to be implicitly conforming to the laws of logic, this
has implications for the broader question of whether the basic Aristotelian
logic is universal or only specifically Western. There may not be any cross-
cultural “universal reason” because of the differences in fundamental
premises, in how different considerations are weighted, and different styles
of reasoning, but if mystical works that appear to be a confusing muddle
actually exemplify being genuinely logical, then this is at least some prima
facie evidence that some logical principles are universal for any belief-
system that can be communicable to others—i.e., the core structure within
each such system regardless of culture may still implicitly conform to these
logical laws, and thus these laws are not the product of the structure of
Indo-European languages.
      The examples utilized here are too limited to show that all cultures of
the world accept the rules of logic, and the possibility that I am imposing
rationality onto mystical writings can never be ruled out. But this chapter
does show at least that there is a very real possibility that mystical works
are rational. Not everyone may be rational, nor may anyone be totally
rational in all of his or her thoughts, but the obvious instances of mystical
strategies that on the surface appear irrational can be seen on closer
examination possibly to be rational. (Indeed, intentionally employing
paradoxes for soteriological purposes would be the exception that proves
the rule: this practice would show that mystics are aware that consistency is
the norm and only utilize paradoxes to startle listeners about what is
experienced in mystical experiences.) At a minimum, these examples
present difficulties for any characterizations about the “inscrutable Oriental
mind” or other characterizations about mystics in general that present them
as necessarily operating irrationally or with their own unique standards.
                                    8

                        Mysticism and Science