Experience and Knowledge
Mystical experiences are what is distinctive about mysticism, but as noted
in the last chapter classical mystics do not typically discuss their own
experiences or the nature of mystical experiences in general. They are
interested in aligning their lives with what is real. Thus, they discuss
knowledge, what is real, values and virtues, how to cultivate mystical
experiences, and how to follow the path to enlightenment, not their own
experiences. They are no more interested in the experiences themselves
than scientists typically are in theirs. The results—what is learned—are
usually all that matters, not the experiences themselves. Thus, mystical
statements are normally no more about experiences than scientific
statements are about sense-experiences rather than stars, quarks, or
whatever—i.e., something deemed real regardless of the experiences. In
addition, unlike in science, the justification of mystical knowledge-claims is
typically not experiential evidence but the revealed texts or other authority
of one’s tradition (as discussed below).
      But to mystics their knowledge comes from mystical experiences, not
from reflection, speculation, other experiences, or “feelings” in the sense of
emotions.3 Nor is a mystical experience an intuition in the sense of an
intellectual jump from a line of reasoning to a conclusion. Rather, there is a
felt sense of contact with a reality, with the proper interpretation of what is
experienced (and thus of what knowledge is actually gained) being supplied
by a traditional authority. As discussed below, some scholars in religious
studies dispute this claim, but many neuroscientists are coming to conclude
that mystical experiences are genuine neurological events that are distinct
from other mental events and are not merely products of imagination
(Newberg, d’Aquili, & Rause 2002: 7), even if they reject alleged mystical
insights. That they are “genuine” experiences does not necessarily mean
that transcendent realities are involved in introvertive mystical experiences
or that mystical experiences provide knowledge, but only that they are not
some more ordinary experience. I can imagine Jacob Marley’s ghost
standing in my room clanking his chains; I can even fabricate a “sense of
presence,” but this does not mean I am experiencing a ghost, and any
neuroscanning of my brain would only show that the areas related to
imagination are active during the event. Mystical experiences are not of that
nature but involve new states of consciousness. Any knowledge from them,
if valid, is not simply a change in our understanding but involves a new
experience of reality of some kind.
      What exactly is “experience” or “an experience” receives relatively
little discussion in philosophy or in neuroscience. The general idea is that
an experience is an event having some emotional, volitional, or allegedly
cognitive content. Philosophers typically define “cognitive experiences” in
terms of awareness of an object by a separate subject, as in sense-
experience. We can only have an experience when we are conscious, and
consciousness is “on” only when there is an object of awareness, whether
one is awake or dreaming. Knowledge is knowledge of something, whether
of facts (knowing-that) or by acquaintance of a separate object or person.
But mystical knowledge, if valid, is a third type of knowledge not
recognized by modern philosophy: a receptive knowledge by participation
or knowledge by identity where there is no object separated from the
knower. It is a direct knowledge in the way that knowledge of a distinct
object is not: one has become what is experienced. It is not a matter of
accepting belief-claims, although some belief-claims must follow. To
Christians, there is no apprehension of God as an object; rather, God
becomes active in the ground of the soul (McGinn 2008: 52).
      Mystical experiences involve a modification of our consciousness, but
there is no experience of any object (including consciousness) since there
can be no object present that is set off from the experiencer. The dichotomy
of appearance and reality (phenomenon and noumenon) is not applicable.
There is not even an awareness of the experiencer. Only after introvertive
experiences are over does what was experienced become an object of
consciousness for the experiencer’s understanding—then the mind makes a
mental image of the reality, and so what was experienced becomes an object
of consciousness among other such objects. These experiences are not
“objective” in the sense of an awareness of something existing
independently of the experiencer, or “subjective” in the sense of
experiencing something the experiencers themselves create. Rather, there is
a sense of simply being rather than experiencing something distinct from
oneself. Self-awareness is the closest analogy since this cognitive
awareness does not involve an object distinct from the experiencer during
the experience. Mystical experiences may be unique among allegedly
cognitive experiences in this regard.
     Philosophers, however, typically see mystical knowledge in terms of
the sense-experience paradigm, and problems result (as discussed in the
next chapter). Even some mystics are reluctant to call a depth-mystical
experience an “experience” since it is empty of all differentiated content;
with no object of awareness involved, some refer to it as a state of
nonknowledge or nonconsciousness. Indeed, such phrases as “experience
of” or “awareness of” do not handle this type of knowledge, but in English
we do not have words to express this without using the idea of knowledge
of something. Thereby, they implicitly accept that the terms “experience,”
“consciousness,” and “cognition” are limited to intentional experiences of
objects—i.e., dualistic situations with a knower and an object known. In
addition, experiences are separate mental events, but the state of
mindfulness and the enlightened state are continuing states of
consciousness, not that “consciousness” and a “state of consciousness” are
any easier to define than “experience.”