The first issue is simply to identify what mysticism is. The term derives
from the Latin word “mysticus” and ultimately from the Greek “mustikos.”1
The Greek root “muo” means “to close or conceal” and hence “hidden.”2
The word came to mean “silent” or “secret,” i.e., doctrines and rituals that
should not be revealed to the uninitiated. The adjective “mystical” entered
the Christian lexicon in the second century when it was adapted by
theologians to refer, not to inexpressible experiences of God, but to the
mystery of “the divine” in liturgical matters, such as the invisible God being
present in sacraments and to the hidden meaning of scriptural passages, i.e.,
how Christ was actually being referred to in Old Testament passages
ostensibly about other things. Thus, theologians spoke of mystical theology
and the mystical meaning of the Bible. But at least after the third-century
Egyptian theologian Origen, “mystical” could also refer to a contemplative,
direct apprehension of God. The nouns “mystic” and “mysticism” were
only invented in the seventeenth century when spirituality was becoming
separated from general theology.3 In the modern era, mystical
interpretations of the Bible dropped away in favor of literal readings. At
that time, modernity’s focus on the individual also arose. Religion began to
become privatized in terms of the primacy of individuals, their beliefs, and
their experiences rather than being seen in terms of rituals and institutions.
“Religious experiences” also became a distinct category as scholars
beginning in Germany tried, in light of science, to find a distinct
experiential element to religion. Only in the early 1800s did a theologian
(Friedrich Schleiermacher) first try to ground Christian faith in religious
experiences. And only in that era did the term “mysticism” come to refer
primarily to certain types of religious experiences (involving “infused
contemplation” as opposed to ordinary grace).
      But this is not to deny that there were mystics in the modern sense
earlier or in other cultures. Simply because the term “mysticism” did not
refer explicitly to experiences before the modern era does not mean that
“mystical theology” was not informed by mystical experiences. In
Christianity, mystics were called “contemplatives.”4 The Syrian monk
Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite first used the phrase “mystical theology”
in around 500 CE to refer to a direct experience of God. Bernard of
Clairvaux in the twelfth century first referred to the “book of experience.”
By the Middle Ages, when Christian contemplatives were expounding the
“mystical” allegorical and symbolic meaning of biblical passages, the
meanings they saw were ultimately based on the notion of unmediated
experiences of God—in Bonaventure’s words, “a journey of the mind into
God.” “Mystical theology” then meant the direct awareness of God, not a
discipline of theology in the modern sense; and the “mystical meaning” of
the Bible meant the hidden message for attaining God directly through
experience.
      Today “mysticism” has become a notoriously vague term. In popular
culture, “mystical” refers to everything from all occult and paranormal
phenomena (e.g., speaking in tongues or alleged miracles) to everyday
things such as childbirth or viewing a beautiful sunset. But in this book
“mystical” will refer only to phenomena centered around an inward quest
focused on two specific classes of experiences. However, it is important
first to note that mysticism is a more encompassing phenomenon than
simply practices related to cultivating mystical experiences. Mysticism is no
more private than religion in general. It is a sociocultural phenomenon, but
one in which a particular range of experiences has a central role. It is a
“way” (yana, dao) in the sense of both a path and a resulting way of life.
Mystical traditions involve values, rituals, action-guides, and belief-
commitments. Traditionally, mysticism is also tied to comprehensive
religious ways of life.5 Only in the modern era has mysticism come to be
seen as a matter of only special experiences. The modern reduction of
mysticism to merely a matter of personal experiences was solidified by
William James in 1902 (1958). Nevertheless, mysticism is traditionally
more encompassing than simply isolated mystical experiences: it is about
living one’s whole life aligned with reality as it truly is (as defined by a
tradition’s beliefs).
      Nevertheless, what distinguishes mysticism is its unique experiences:
it is the role of certain types of experiences central to mysticism that
separates it from other forms of religiosity and metaphysics. “Mysticism” is
not simply the name for the experiential component of any religious way of
life or for the inner life of the intensely pious or scrupulously observant
followers of any strand of religiosity. One can be an ascetic or rigorous in
fulfilling the demands of a religion without having the experiences that
distinguish mystics. Nor is mysticism the “essence” or “core” of all religion
—there are other ways of being religious and other types of religious
experiences, even if mystics have been a shaping force in every religion.6
Indeed, many mainline Protestants deny that God can be united with in any
sense (since we cannot become divine) or known experientially (since God
is utterly transcendent and so cannot be approached experientially) or that
the self or soul can be denied, and so they deny that mystical experience is a
way of knowing God or reality. Moreover, not all people today who have
mystical experiences are religious: mystical experiences need not be given
any transcendent explanations but can be given naturalistic explanations in
terms of unusual but perfectly normal brain activity or of a brain
malfunction having no epistemic or ontic significance at all. In particular,
isolated spontaneous mystical experiences (i.e., ones occurring without any
prior intentional cultivation through meditation or ones stimulated by drugs
or other artificial “triggers”) are often taken to have no ontic implications.7
In short, mystical experiences are not always taken to be revealing a
“divine” reality.