mammal areolae become "oculi" (with female, proptosis), navel to "nares," pubes to "mouth," and with male, penis to "lingua." This face, though quite vacuous of itself, can be made quite frightening, sad or happy with proper programming. Once seen, it is easily programmed even with extreme body position changes. Analysis shows, in a particular case, that this face is in storage from very young childhood and was generated/resulted from phantasies about bodies, male and female, threatening/seductive. This projection is useful as a tracer of certain kinds of fears. THE BLANK SCREEN The external reality screens for the projection of the display program in the LSD state thus can be arranged in a set with various dimensions relating each to the others. Among these are: the nonselfreal persons; motion pictures of these persons in various states; still pictures of the persons; pictures of self from the past, motion and still, three dimensional and flat; the here-andnow threedimensional color image of one's face and/or body in a mirror; and finally, the eyesopen or eyesclosed blank unlighted or lighted projection screen. The blank projection screen introspectively considered varies depending upon whether the eyes are open or closed. In the dark, in the absolute dark, one can detect differences between the eyes open and the eyes closed blank screen. The eyes open case gives a feeling of depth out beyond the eyes, a feeling of a 24 real visual space. In this subject the eyes closed immediately turns the vision to a different visual space which seems more internal, more introspective, more subjective. In the LSD25 state these differences are attenuated in the profound isolation conditions. The blank screen is the most difficult one to work with but is the least "driving" of the group. The blank screen interferes least with one's creative efforts; it takes more program circuitry to create those aspects which can be furnished by the other screens themselves, from the perception mechanisms directly into the projection program itself. The blank screen does not so easily show the "forbidden transitions" except by remaining blank, i.e., more relaxation and freedom to "free associate" with this visual mode is required to project on a blank screen. At times the crossmodel synesthetic projection may help with the blank screen; excitation coming in the objective hearing mechanisms can be converted to excite visual projection. The commonest excitation used here is music; this wellorganized patterned input tends to "drive the content by association." For instance, religious music can evoke religious visions constructed in childhood from real pictures, churches and phantasies, etc. Other inputs are voices, one's own real or recorded voice, the voice of another person these sources can have problems similar to those with the pictures. The high priority program we are calling the external reality program may tend to usurp the circuitry and take over from the projection program with pictures or voices of known and valued persons. This

effect interrupts the projection and its free association. In the long run the external reality's content and its connections can be shown to be relevant by continued selfanalysis, using the usual techniques of psychoanalysis. Such interruptions depend upon the individual computer and its conflicts in relation to the projection program versus the external reality program. If there is guilt or fear present, the ex-25 ternal sources will attract the energy of the computer back to the external reality. Alternatively, if the level of excitation from the person in the external reality rises above a certain value, the whole computer will be turned to that particular person and his/her vocal output and his/her behaviors. Purely random noise may avoid these difficulties; it may be a proper acoustically lighted blank screen for crossmodel excitation of the visual projections. Initial experiments with inphase and nonphase noise in the two ears show some new programming possibilities. One pitfall, here, however, is to avoid the initial problem of the programming by the random processes of the noise itself. This tends to result in chaotic programming, i.e., randomness itself can build up to a large intensity within the metaprogramming systems. With adjustment of the acoustic intensity of the two nonphase related noises these effects can be attenuated and the noisily lighted visual screen used for proper projection purposes. Only preliminary experiments have been done in this region as yet. ZERO LEVEL EXTERNAL REALITY When sufficient progress with the external reality projection screens of the various kinds (visual, acoustic to visual synesthetic, body image, and others), the elimination or at least maximal attenuation of all modes of stimulation from the external reality allows deeper direct penetration into the unconscious. The rationale here is that more circuitry in one's huge computer is freed up from the external excitation programs and hence more can be devoted to the internal cognitive reality and its analysis. The projection "program" is still used, but in a somewhat different way. In the maximally attenuated environment (92 to 95°F. isothermal skin, saltwater suspension, zero light levels, nearzero26 sound levels, without clothes, without wall or floor contacts, in solitude in remote isolation, for several hours), the addition of LSD25 allows one to see that all the previous experiences with "outside screens" are evasions of deeper penetration of self (and hence are screens in the sense of "blocking the view behind," as well as "receiving the projected images"). DEFINITION OF EVASION OF ANALYSIS OF METAPROGRAMS In using the term evasion it is meant to imply a similar concept to defensive maneuvers or defenses of the psychoanalytic literature. However, in addition to the content of these