human computer interlock achieved among these mathematicians created a new entity greater than any one of them in regard to modes of thinking, complexity of thinking, and creative new ideas. Certain kinds of things that Man does of necessity require tremendous amounts of cooperation among very large numbers of individuals. Such accomplishments are beyond any one individual and are a product only of the group effort. This is true, for example, in building the Empire State Building, a subway system, a railroad system, an airline, a large industrial factory, etc. In each of these cases there is a rearrangement of external realities, a setting up of a communication network between many individuals and a dedication of each of these individuals to the purposes of the organization of which they are a part. This is probably the greatest accomplishment of our industrial, military, educational and religious efforts in this century. Man's xxviii effective interlock with other men can accomplish certain kinds of things beyond any individual. However, in certain areas, gifted, talented, intelligent individuals seem to function almost autonomously as solitudinous computers giving rise to new findings. This is seen in the case of the mathematical geniuses raised in isolation. One is almost afraid to educate such people for fear that they will lose their general purpose nature and their ability to make original creative contributions. Somehow or other they have escaped interlock into Man's ever more pervasive social organizations and their demands. As in the case of the creative physicist Moseley, who was drafted and killed in World War 1, such talent can be thrown away by the operations of the necessity of interlock in our society. There is a point of view in the modern world and there are divisions among intellectuals which are wasting our use of talent and genius. There are antithetical philosophies which cause diversive intellectual activities. It may be that such conflict is necessary for the intellectual advancement of each individual. It may also be completely superfluous and nonsensical. C. P. Snow has pointed out in his writings (especially those about the two cultures) that one kind of social dichotomy about which I speak. The value systems of each intellectual reflect his prejudices, his biases, his blindnesses, as well as his areas of competence. It seems to be a very foolish maneuver to take that which one knows, that in which one is excellent and raise it above the general intellectual level of all other intellectuals. One technique of raising what one and one's most intimate colleagues know above the surrounding intellectual terrain is to literally dig an intellectual moat around one's field of activity. To dig this moat one demeans and denigrates areas of knowledge and individuals in those fields surrounding one's own field. This kind of activity seems to be almost builtin in our structure as biological organisms. T.C.L St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, 1967 Contents

Foreword to Second Edition, v Preface to Second Edition, viii Preface to First Edition, xv Introduction, 1 1. Use of ProjectionDisplay Techniques in Deep SelfAnalysis with Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD25), 18 Corporeal Face, 23 Blank Screen, 23 Zero Level External Reality, 25 Definition of Evasion of Analysis of Metaprograms, Inner Cognition Space, 29 Practical Considerations, 35 Definition of a General Purpose SelfMetaprogram,38 2. Summary of Experiments in SelfMetaprogramming with LSD25, 41 Experiments on Basic Metaprograms of Existence, 43 Metaprogrammatic Results of Belief Experiments, 48 3. Personal Metaprogrammatic Language An Example of Its Properties, 53 4. Metaprogramming in the Presence of a Fixed Neurological Program (Migraine): Example of Perception and Belief Interactions, 62 5. Note on the Potentially Lethal Aspects of Certain Unconscious, Protohuman, Survival Programs, 67 6. Choice of Attending Persons During LSD25 State Used for SelfAnalysis, 6 9 xxlx xxx 7. Behavioral, NonIsolation Replay of Protohuman Programs: The Problem of Repetitive Unconscious Replay, 71 8. Basic Effects of LSD25 on the Biocomputer: Noise as the Basic Energy for Projection Techniques, 76 Growth Hypothesis, 79 9. Summary of Basic Theory and Results for Metaprogramming the Positive States with LSD25, 82

10. Coalitions, Interlock and Responsibility, 84 11. Participant Interlock, Coalitions with Individuals of Another Species, 91 Retreats from Interlock, 94 Metaprograms for Interspecies Interlock, 95 Observations with TursiopsHuman Interlock: Mimicry as Evidence of Interlock, 96 12. Summary of Logic Used in this Paper: Truth, Falsity, Probability, Metaprograms and Their Bounds, loo 13. Hardware, Software Relationships in the Human Biocomputer, 104 14. Problems, 107 15. Metaprogramming the Body Image, 109 16. Brain Models, 113 17. Excerpts from The Idiot by Fyodor Dostoyevsky, 122 Summary, 126 Acknowledgments, 128 Glossary, 130 Major Metaprograms, 131 Key to Categories in References and Bibliography, 135 References, 136 Categorized Bibliography, 145 Abstract, 158

List of Figures Figure 1 74 2 115 3 118 4 118 5 118 6 119 7 119 8 120 9 120 10 121 11 121 12 121 List of Tables Table 1 113 2 113 3 114 4 115 5 116 6 116 7 116 8 117 9 117

10 117 Introduction "The general (purpose) computer is. . .a machine in which the operator can prescribe, for any internal state of the machine and for any given condition affecting it, what state it shall go to next. . .All behaviors are at the operator's disposal. A program . . .with the machine forms a mechanism that will show (any thinkable) behavior. This generalization has largely solved the main problem of the brain so far as its objective behavior is concerned; the nature of its subjective aspects may be left to the next generation, if only to reassure them that there are still major scientific worlds left to conquer." (W. Ross Ashby, "What Is Mind?" in Theories of the Mind, Macmillan, New York, 1962.) The relations of the activities of the brain to the subjective life in the mind have long been an arguable puzzle. In this century some advances in the reciprocal fields of study of each aspect of the question apparently can begin to clear up some of the dilemmas. This is a report of a theory and its use which is 2 intended to attempt to link operationally, the (a) mental subjective aspects, (b) neuronal circuit activities, (c) biochemistry, and (d) observable behavioral variables. The sources of information used by the author are mainly (1) the results and syntheses of his own experiments on the CNS* and the behavior of animals, (2) the experiences and results of experiments in profound physical isolation on himself, (3) his own psychoanalytic work on himself and others, (4) his studies and experience with the design, construction, operation and programming of electronic solid state digital storedprogram computers, (5) studies of analogue computers for the analysis and conversion of voice frequency spectra for man and for dolphin and the online computation of multiple continuous data sources,