local growth patterns, i.e., the systems which are selectively active during the LSD25 state. 2. For these postulated growth effects there is an optimal concentration of the substance in the brain. With less concentration than the optimal there is merely an irritating stimulation of the CNS (below the levels of awareness). At the optimal concentration (in the nontolerant state) the phenomena of the LSD25 state occur. This is a phase of initiation of new growth in the CNS. [This phase is a state of mind analogous to that presumed to exist in the very young human (possibly beginning in the fetus or embryo).] 3. If additional material is administered, prolongation of this phase can be achieved within certain limits. With the maintenance of the optimal concentration of substance, this phase is prolonged (hours) until tolerance develops. 4. The phase of developed tolerance is thought to be (in addition to other things) the phase of the completion of the fast new growth. Most of the new biochemical and neurological connections are completed. 5. If continuous maintenance of optimal concentration for many hours (and ? days) after this initial phase is then achieved, growth may continue slowly. 6. The growth is not thought to be confined to the central nervous system. The autonomic nervous system may grow also. 7. If the optimal concentration is exceeded, the substance excites a "stress syndrome" (i.e., adrenalvascular4.l. tract, etc.). (This syndrome is separate from the affective results of the LSD25 state which in certain individuals can cause a stress syndrome. I am not speaking of such individuals. I am speaking of more sophisticated observers who have beenthrough the necessary and sufficient experiences to be able avoid a stress syndrome in the LSD25 state.) 8. At concentrations above the optimal there can be a reversal of the beneficial effects in the induced stress syndrome. Antigrowth factors are stimulated. Homeostasis is thus assured in the organism. A similar phenomenon can be seen with negative programming during the LSD25 experience. Reversal of growth may be programmed in by the selfprogrammer, unconscious metaprograms, or by the outside therapist or other persons. 9. At concentrations above optimal the resulting stress syndrome is programmed into the autonomic nervous system and continues (beyond the time of the presence of the substance) to repeat itself until reprogrammed out days or weeks later. 10. At levels above optimal, the selfmetaprogram loses energy and circuitry to autonomous programs; the ego disappears at very high levels.

This complex series of relations shows the delicate nature of the best state for remetaprogramming and of remetaprogramming itself. Until sophisticated handling (of these substances, the selfmetaprogram, the person, the setting, the preparation, etc.) can be achieved, careful voluntary education of professional personnel should be done, and done carefully with insight. Selection of persons for training must be diplomatic and tactful; it is a strategy to be carried out cooperatively without publicity. Candor and honesty at deep levels is a prime requisite. 9 Summary of Basic Theory and Results for Metaprogramming the Positive States with LSD-25 1. LSD25 facilitates the positive (reward, positive reinforcement) systems in the CNS. (Tables 48, 10 and Figs. 39) 2. LSD2 5 inhibits the negative (punishment, negative reinforcement) systems in the CNS. (Tables 49 and Fig. 9) 3. LSD25 adds noise at all levels, decreasing many thresholds in the CNS. (Table 2 and Fig. 9) 4. The apparent strengths of programs below the usual levels of awareness increase. (Figs. 35 and 9) 5. Programmability of metaprograms (suggestibility) increases, allowing more programming by the selfmetaprogram and external sources [hypersuggestibility of H. Bernheim (1888), Clark Hull (1933).] (Fig. 9) 6. The continuous positive state (positive reinforcement, reward, pleasure) plus inhibited negative system activity causes increased positive reinforcement of the following: a. self b. one's own thinking c. thinking introduced by others d. other persons e. the given environment (r.r.) 83

f. any given patterned complex input (i.e., music, paintings, photos, etc.). (Tables 9 and 10 and Fig. 9) 7. Subsequent to exposure, the effects fall off slowly over a two to sixweeks period, during which period there is overvaluation of 6 (af). Residual effects can be detected up to one year. 8. Repeated exposures at weekly to biweekly periods for several months (years) maintain the above reinforcements if the above conditions, inputs and outputs can be reproduced. There is reinforcement of the positive reinforcements until the usual state before LSD25 becomes negative. 10 Coalitions Interlock and Responsibility Von Foerster ("BioLogic," in Biological Prototypes and Synthetic Systems, Plenum Press, 1962) calls attention to the increasing survival times of increasingly large aggregates of connected matter which he defines as coalitions. Living systems are coalitions par excellence. A protozoan is a coalition of atoms and molecules forming membranes and submicro and micro structures which reproduce by collecting the same kinds of atoms and molecules from the environment to form new identical individuals. A sponge is a primitive coalition of protozoa with enhanced survival over any one protozoan. A man is a tightly organized coalition of cells, including some mobile protozoa (lymphocytes, macrophages, oligodendroglia, etc.). Von Foerster says that mammalian cells of Homo sapiens may be the most numerous cells on earth, i.e., these cells with their multiple level coalitions have the longest current survival time. (Table 2) The nature of mattermatter coalitions and cellcell coalitions and organismorganism coalitions are explored by Von Foerster. For a coalition to exist between any two entities, the dyad is connected by a bond or bonds which reduce the negentropy below the sum of the negentropy of each of the two entities separated (without a linkage). In this view the two entities when in coalition reduce the physical information available externally below the levels of that available from the two entities each unlinked and separated. The coalition as it exists thus appears to be something more than the mere sum of isolated parts. 8485 However, the nature of the linkages in coalitions depends upon the level of aggregations discussed. In a man the coalitions include those between special atoms in spatial arrangements with others (alpha helices, etc.), special cells in spatial patterns (liver, brain, etc.), and organism coalition tissues such as circulatory, lymph, and autonomic nervous systems. The bones assure a maintenance of total form of the net coalition of a person under a one g gravitational field. The continuance of important aspects of the