large. Support has been obtained for further examination and demonstration of the large size, detailed excellence of structure, and description of the large dolphin brain; there is no lack of interest in this area. The faulting out comes in obtaining the operating Chapter 11 was published in part: Lilly, J. C. 1966. "Communication with Extraterrestrial Intelligence" (1965 IEEE Military Electronics Conf. Washington, D. C., Sept. 1965) IEEE Spectrum 3: (3) 159160. 91 92 interest of competent working scientists in evaluation of the performance of these large brains; interest and commitment of time and self are needed for progress. The current effort on the part of this author is aimed at devising a program of encouragement for creating some models of the human end of the interspecies system which will illustrate, elucidate, and elaborate the basic assumptions needed to encourage interest and research effort in this area. Each mammalian brain functions as a computer with properties, programs, and metaprograms partly to be defined and partly to be determined by observation. The human computer contains at least 13 billions of active elements, and hence is functionally and structurally larger than any artificially built computer of the present era. This human computer has the properties of modern artificial computers of large size plus additional ones not yet achieved in the nonbiological machines. The human computer has "stored program" properties. "Stored metaprograms" are also present. Among the suggested properties are "selfprogramming" and "selfmetaprogramming." Programming and metaprogramming language is different for each human depending upon developmental, experiential, genetic, educational, accidental, and selfchosen variables and elements and values. Basically the verbal forms for programming are those of the native language of the individual modulated by nonverbal language elements acquired in the same epochs of the development of that individual. Each such computer has scales of selfmeasuration and self-evaluation. Constant and continuous computations are being done giving aim and goaldistance estimates of external reality performances and internal reality achievements. Comparison scales are set up between human biocomputers for performance measures of each and of several in concert. Each biocomputer models other biocomputers of importance to itself, beginning immediately postpartum, with greater or lesser degrees of error. 93 The phenomenon of "computerinterlock" facilitates mutual model construction and operation, each of the other. One biocomputer interlocks with one or more other

biocomputers above and below the level of awareness any time the communicational distance is sufficiently small to bring the interlock functions above threshold levels. In the complete physical absence of other external biocomputers within the critical interlock distance, the selfdirected and otherdirected programs can be clearly detected, analyzed, recomputed, reprogrammed, and new metaprograms initiated by the solitudinous biocomputer itself. In the ascompletelyaspossibleattenuatedphysicalreality environment in solitude, a maximum intensity, a maximum complexity and a maximum speed of reprogramming is achievable by the self. In the field of scientific research such a computer can function in many different ways, from the pure austere thought processing of theory and mathematics, to the almost random data absorption of the naturalistic approach with newly found systems or to the coordinated interlocks with other human biocomputers of an engineering effort. At least two extreme major kinds of methods of data collection and analysis exist for individual scientists the artificially created, controlledelement, inventeddevisedsystem methods; and the participantobserver interacting intimately experientially with naturally given elements with nonhuman (or human) biocomputers as interacting parts of the system. The first kind is the current basis of individual physicalchemical research, the latter kind is one basis for individual explorative first discovery research with largebrained (cf. human size) organisms. Sets of human motivational and procedural postulates for the interlock method of research with and on beings with biocomputers as large and larger than the human biocomputers are sought. Some of the methods sought are those of establishing long periods (months, years) of humantoother organisms biocomputer inter94 lock of a quality and value sufficiently high to merit interspecies communication efforts on both sides at an intense and dedicated, highlystructured level. RETREATS FROM INTERLOCK Some human scientists faced with nonhuman species who have braincomputers equal to or larger than their own, retreat from responsibilities of interlock research into a set of beliefs peculiar to manual, manipulating, bipedal, featherless, recording, dry, airvocalizing, cooperatingintraspecies, lethalpredatory-dangerous, virtuousselfimage, powerfulimmature, ownspecies-worshipping primates, with 1400 gram brains. Specifically, human scientists faced with dolphins (with 1800 gram brains) retreat into several safe cognitive areas, out of contact with the dolphins themselves. The commonest evasion of contact is the assumption of a human a priori knowledge of what constitutes "scientific research on dolphins," i.e., a limited philosophical, speciesspecific, closedconcept system.

Common causes of retreat are too great fear of the dolphin's large size, of the sea, of going into water, of the Tropics, of cold water, etc. Another safe retreat is into the let's see what happens if we do this or the experimental "mucking around" region. Years can be spent on this area with no interlock achieved; successful evasion is thus continued endlessly. Increasingly and frequently scientists are trying the let's pretend we are nonexistent (to the dolphins) observers and do a peepingTomthroughunderwaterwindows on them, commonly called an "ethological approach." This activity also evades interlock research quite successfully. Other cognitive traffic control devices to evade the responsibilities of close contact are appearing about as rapidly as each additional kind of scientist enters the arena with the dolphins: 95 icthyologists, zoologists, comparative psychologists, anthropologists, ethologists, astronomers each has had at least one representative of his field approach dolphins. Each one thinks up good and sufficient reasons for not continuing interlock research and not devoting his personal resources and those of his scientific field to such farout, nonapplied, longterm, basic research. Nonscientisttype persons also approach; most leave with similar sophistries. A few stay. Some who stay have an exploitative gleam in their eye: dollargleam, militaryapplicationgleam, self-aggrandizementgleam. Some persons stay because of a sense of wonder, awe, reverence, curiosity, and an intuitive feel of dolphins themselves. The dolphin respecting (not dolphinloving) persons (scientists or not) are the potential interlock group sought; dedication to dolphinhuman interlock without evasions is a difficult new profession. The persons I know in this class are few, as of 1965. The few need help: facilities, assistance of the right sorts, privacy, few demands of other kinds, money, cognitive and intellectual backup, encouragement, enlightened discussions, and, of course, dolphins. This is currently a necessarily lonely profession. METAPROGRAMS FOR INTERSPECIES INTERLOCK Several authors have proposed models of human and nonhuman communication based on purely logical, linguistic, and computer grounds. (See, for example, Lincos, a language for cosmic intercourse, by Freudenthal.) Such models suffer from one major defect: they lack the necessary experience in the proposer with interlock research with a nonhuman species; the storage banks of the theorizer are filled only with humantype interlock data. Of course this does not mean that these models are totally inapplicable, it merely assures a subtle pervasive anthropocentricity which may be inappropriate. 96