awareness in the adult, can be controlling for the later adult programs, adult thinking, and adult behavior. Energy can be taken from some of these automatic metaprograms and transferred to the selfmetaprogram with special techniques and special central states, chemically evoked. Some automatic unperceived programs are essential to biological nurture, survival, etc. Examples of methods, of investigations and of results in selfanalysis and selfmetaprogramming are given. Acknowledgments The author is grateful for a National Institute of Mental Health Career Award (of the National Institute of Mental Health, N.l.H., Bethesda, Md. 19621967) which gave the time and impetus necessary for the conception and the writing of this work. The National Institute of Mental Health also furnished the wherewithal for some of the experiments during the term of the author's service (19531958) in the U. S. Public Health Service Commissioned Officers Corps, jointly at the National Institute of Mental Health and at the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness at the National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Md. In addition, at various times, portions of the work were supported in part by grants from the Air Force Officer of Scientific Research, the National Science Foundation, the National Aeronautics and Space Agency, the National Institute of Neurological Diseases and Blindness, N.l.H., and G. Unger Vetlesen Foundation, and the Michael Tors Foundation. For this support the author expresses his gratitude. The author wishes to express his appreciation to the Institute of the Philadelphia Association of Psychoanalysis and the Baltimore Institute for the opportunity to take his psychoanalytic research preparation and training analysis (19491956). In particular, he is indebted to Dr. Robert Waelder and the faculties of that period, including Drs. Gerald Pierson (dean), Henry Katz, George Sprague, Eli Marcowitz, Amanda Stoughton, Jenny WaelderHall, Anderson and Lewis Hill. Dr. Lawrence Kubie has been most helpful with his metatheoretical reformulations of 128 129 psychoanalytic theory. Dr. Douglas Bond's insistance on the combined neurological and psychoanalytic training gave confidence when needed. Over the years the necessity and inspiration for the pursuit of the logic and languages of artificial computers as related to the brain were learned from Warren McCulloch. An opportunity to pursue this area of research in depth was arranged by Dr. Walter Rosenblith in 1962. To the LINC group at Massachusetts Institute of Technology (now at Washington University, St. Louis) the author wishes to express appreciation for coursework, patient teaching and help with a LINC computer during its development phases-in particular Dr. Wesley Clark, Mary Allen Wilkes Clark, B. G. Farley, and Dr. Thomas T. Sandel contributed much needed time.

In many ways discussions of the materials of this work with Drs. Fred G. Worden, Charles Savage, Joel Elkes, Seymour Kety, Willis Harman, and Sidney Cohen have aided in its formulation, and have indicated the desirability of its publication. I am grateful to my colleagues (past and present) in the Communication Research Institute for many invigorating discussions, including Gregory Bateson, Drs. Peter J. Morgane and Henry M. Truby. Glossary 1. Communication: the process of the exchange of information between two or more minds la. Communication: the process of exchange of information between metaprogramming entities within two or more computers. 2. Information: the calculated mental results of the reception of signals from another mind and the computed composed context of the next reply to be formed into transmissible signals. 2a. Information: the data received, computed, and stored resulting from the reception of signals by a metaprogramming entity from another computer and the computed data in the ready state in the same entity for transmission to another computer through a similar set of signals. 3. Mind: the entity comprising all of the (at least potentially) selfdetectable processes in a brain which are at such a level of program complexity as to be detected and at least potentially describable in programming language; the selfmetaprograms within the brain. 3a. Mind: a form of metaprogram in the software set of a very large biocomputer which organizes metaprograms for the purposes of selfprogramming and of communication. 3b. Mind: the computerbraindetectable portion of a supraphysical entity tied to the physicalbiological apparatus 130 131 the remainder of this entity is in the soulspiritGod region and is detectable only under special conditions. 4. Program: a set of internally consistent instructions for the computation of signals, the formation of information, the storage of both, the preparation of messages, the logical processes to be used, the selection processes, and the storage addresses all occurring within a biocomputer, a brain.

5. Metaprogram a set of instructions, descriptions, and means of control of sets of programs. 6. Selfmetaprogram: a special metaprogram which involves the selfprogramming aspects of the computer, which creates new programs, revises old programs, and reorganizes programs and metaprograms. This entity works only directly on the metaprograms, not the programs themselves; metaprograms work on each program and the detailed instructions therein. Alternative names are set of selfmetaprograms, "selfmetaprogramming entity," or the selfmetaprogrammer. MAJOR METAPROGRAMS 1. External Reality Metaprogram This metaprogram operates programs with interlock with the outsidebodysystems. These systems include all of external reality; human beings are a defined part of the external reality. This metaprogram seems to be absent only in special states and even then possibly is only relatively attenuated, not completely absent. The states in which it is attenuated include sleep, coma, trance, anaesthesia, etc. The above states cause centrally conditioned reductions of the stimulation arriving from the external reality. It is also possible to attenuate the external reality stimuli themselves. 132 In the profound physical isolation, external reality excitation of the CNS is attenuated to minimum possible levels in all modes. If in profound physical isolation, one adds a metaprogrammatically active substance to the brain (such as LSD25), further attenuation of the external reality stimuli can be achieved and the ego (selfmetaprogram) is more fully activated. If in profound physical isolation one adds sleep, trance, or anaesthesia (light levels), these give external reality cutoff and cessation of e.r. (external reality) excitation of the central nervous system (and of the "mind"). The external reality metaprogram is increased in its intensity in high excitation states; interlock with the external reality can be increased by these means. 2. Selfmetaprograms These metaprograms include all of those entities which are usually defined as ego, consciousness, self, and so forth. The interlock of the selfmetaprograms with the external reality metaprograms can be attenuated by special techniques including sleep, LSD25 plus isolation, anaesthesia, etc.