channels; feedingeating; and such metachannel problems as initiative in use, crosschannel relations simultaneously with intrachannel control of signals, kinds of signals which can and cannot be decoded into information at each end, etc. One channel we have disciplined ourselves and the dolphins to pursue is the airborne vocal and hearing one.* In this channel we have found a clue to progress in the other channels if one is to be convincing in regard to showing a program and metaprogram wish to communicate, one mimics the other end's signals even though (temporarily) the signals make no sense, and one insists on having one's own signals mimicked on the same basis. This leads to mimicry of our swimming patterns by the dolphins, for example, when we have mimicked theirs. Mimicry seems to be one program for demonstrations of the present state of the model of the dolphin in us and of us in the dolphin. The adequacy of the functioning of the human in the mandolphin interlock is measured by the feedback represented by mimicry. The mechanism is similar if not identical to that of a human child mimicking adult use of words (silently or vocally) not yet in the child's "storage" and "use" programs. Plea for Further Research In summary, a plea is made for the development of a theory of the communicator, human type, faced with a nonhuman communicator with a brain and presumed mind of a high quality. The theory should include openended, nonspeciesspecific, general purpose, selfprogramming, mutual respect, voluntary dedication, participant theorist kinds of basic assumptions. Beyond these assumptions are those of the proper selection of participants, support, interest in the scientific community, and cooperation on an operating contributing level by openminded professionals. *OP. cit. I.A.S.A. 43 14121424. 12 Summary of Logic Used in this Paper: Truth, Falsity, Probability, Metaprograms and Their Bounds For the sake of clarity the following presentation of the logic employed in this paper is given. It is quite apparent that there is at least a fourvalue logic employed. There are the usual 'true' and 'false' values; in addition there is another pair which in a shorthand way can be called 'as if true' and 'as if false.' Each of these four values can be applied to the external reality and to the internal reality of the human biocomputer. The notation employed is as follows for the external reality applications, 'true' and 'false' are rewritten without quotes. 'As if true' and 'as if false' are written with an asterisk ahead

of the true and ahead of the false (*true, *false). For the internal realities situation, i.e., the occurrence of these values in the software of the human biocomputer, double quotation marks are placed around "true," "false," "as if true" and "as if false," ("*true" and "*false"). Externally checkable, observable reality, i.e., with external proof, uses the value system: true, false, *true and *false. In the internal reality, i.e., in the area of internal judgment, internal belief, in the selfmetaprogrammer, the values are symbolized with quotation marks, "true" and "false" "*true" "*false." In the internal reality case, for each of these values, there is a metaprogram which can be stated as follows: "define as true 100 101 (or false) a given metaprogram." (In the main body of the paper this is a basic belief for survival, for example.) A less intense metaprogram is "defined as if true a given metaprogram or defined as if false a given metaprogram." In the experiments on basic beliefs, "if defined as "true" then the metaprogram is "true" within limits to be determined," and "if defined "*true" then "true" within limits to be determined." These various values may be modified with a judgment of their probability and with the defining of the desired intensity. The probability scale is 1.0 for absolutely certain, a gradation of probability down to the value O which is improbable and to 1 for impossible. Such values are applied to each of the four logic categories with regard to a specific metaprogram. Such a logic system can be seen operating in the external human reality in coalitions of various sorts. A coalition can function 'as if an internal judgment' in the sense that it defines certain things as "true" which are then true within limits to be determined. The usual structure of human law seems to share this property. The concept of consensus wisdom (Galbraith) includes this logic system. There are certain metaprograms and programs which have an imperative, externallyproven truthfalsity relationship which cannot be manipulated within the human biocomputer without danger to its existence. These metaprograms and programs can be considered as imperatives from some parts of the program level of the human biocomputer which must function as supraselfmetaprograms (i.e., there must be recognition of the "built-in," "necessary for survival nature" of these programs). Some of these true programs are yet to be determined in biological science. The following have been determined: the necessity of obtaining food in response to hunger, the necessity of sexual activities and pleasure, adequate responses to pain and fear (such as freeze, flee, or fight).