(b) Malefemale continuously, at all ages, especially in the marriage coalition. (c) Financial individual (money) income and outgo is a multiple general purpose coalition sign. The amount of money whose flow is controlled by a given individual is, in general, a quantitative measure of coalition responsibility delegated to that individual by coalitions of many other individuals. An individual can be the controller of a coalition only with multiple consents, and hence control the flow of money into and out of that coalition. (d) Children: exciting demanding coalitions develop with one's offspring. It is a challenge to renew and improve one's own coalition with each child as the child grows and expands his/her coalition powers. (e) Unconscious coalitions below the levels of awareness, one expects certain kinds of conditions in one's coalitions; some wishful thinking is expended in phantasied linkages. Contracts as written usually do not, cannot, incorporate explicit statements of unconscious commitments/desires. However, a contract can be misused in the service of wishful thinking-the courts see numerous cases of this kind The problems attendant upon breaking humanhuman coalitions can be smoothly worked out, be somewhat energetic, or can generate much heat, smoke and fire. The real bond energy left in the linkages usually can be dissipated at any rate desired; the fuss and furor (external energy dissipation) seems to be directly proportional to the energy in the bond and to the rate of bond dissolution, i.e., directly proportioned to the time taken and energy spent to obtain agreement on both sides of the humanhuman linkage. But the rate control and the necessities of agreement to break the coalition must be dispassionately and objectively evaluated. Unless one knows how to control the results, one desires to avoid exciting protohuman survival 89 programs below the levels of awareness in either or both parties in the coalition; these programs require continuous care and maintenance. Some essential factors of any and all humanhuman coalitions are circular feedback, distance rules, positive (attractive) and negative (repulsive) motives, excitation and inhibition rules and limits, and coalition field agreements. Each human coalition is formed in a coalition field surrounded by other coalitions with other individuals and with institutional agents. The connectivity of a given coalition with all other coalitions is multiple and complex. One is born and raised in a coalition field which is dynamic and growing; in this field the coalitions vary over a great range of apparent durations. Some coalitions are made to last beyond a single human lifetime; others to last a few minutes or hours or days or weeks.

The freed bond energy from a broken coalition is used to form new coalitions, or to strengthen others. For example, a resignation is preferable to a firing; a new pair of necessary coalitions can take the place of the old one with overlap and without break in services; or the duties of the old coalition are distributed over others. The bond energies in human coalitions are of two types: attractive and repulsive; to maintain a viable coalition these links must be excited and inhibited by each member within certain limits of time, intensity, rate, etc. Sometimes a coalition has aspects of two persons pulling one another together with two ropes and, simultaneously, pushing one another apart with two poles; the coalition requires adjustment and readjustment of the two pushes and the two pulls involved. (The doublebind, G. Bateson) Our concept of individual human responsibility rests on the above mappings of multilevel coalitions at each developmental age of the human being. Responsibility starts with a satisfactory coalition between one's self and the demanding 1012 cells of one's own body. 90 Responsibility continues with humanhuman coalitions, with interspecies coalitions (from immunity to bacteria, to eating plants and animals, to interspecies communication), with concepts of self (origins, maintenance, progress, destinations), and strong open communication of one's self with one's innermost realities. In this paper the multiple levels of responsibility and the necessities for a strong autonomous character in order to pursue this research are underscored. In order to function effectively in human society the depths of the mind must be functioning relatively smoothly under the guidance of the self. To develop this degree of smooth function may require strong measures; these measures require strong educated handling. Participant Interlock, Coalitions with Individuals of Another Species For approximately the last nine years the author has struggled with the problems of devising working models of the interspecies communication problem at a relatively high structured cognitive level. The major portion of the total problem has been found to be the author's own species, rather than the delphinic ones. There is apparently no currently available adequate theory of the human portion of the communication network, ManDolphin. The lack of such a theory has made it difficult for most scientists to see the reality of the problems posed in the interspecies program. As long as the consciousunconscious basic belief exists of the preeminence of the human brain and mind over all other earthside brains and minds, little credence can be obtained for the proposition that a problem of interspecies communication exists. Despite arguments based on the complexity and size of certain nonhuman mammalian brains, little if any general belief in the project has been instilled in the scientific community at