the first can be found and an evaluation made of the differences in thresholds, in area distributions of thresholds and in analogous areas between the two CNS's. A more detailed proposal is given in the following Chapter 14.14.Problems Human Biocomputer: Biophysical Analysis and Control of Brain ActivityProgram Levels (Figs. 29 & Tables 310) Program Level ) > relations Brain Activity Level ) (1.0) Hypothesize a double connection to every CNS neuron of the 10^10 array of neurons. a. The first connection picks up the firing sign (action potential) of each neuron. b. The second connection furnishes an electrical pulse (10^5 sec. duration) which fires each neuron, no matter its threshold for firing. (2.0) Hypothesize a method of storing signs of (la) as they occur, in the storage of a huge computer, each sign stored by time and place of occurrence, over a time of 1/2 hour (1800 sec., 1.8 x 10^9 micro sec.). (2.1) Record total behavior of organism over a time of 1/2 hour. (3.0) At any time later, all stored signs are put out through connections (1b) in original sequence. (3.1) Record resulting behavior of organism for the 1/2 hr. Of replay. 107108 (4.0) Questions: I. Does 3.1 record , , or 2.1 record?

II. Does subjective life during 3.0 , , or 2.0 interval? (See IX below.) III. Is there memory of 2.0 during 3.0? Afterwards? IV. Are 3.0 and 2.0 remembered as two time periods and event sequences? V. Does psychophysical testing with objective records during 3.0 give identical results to same tests (using same time course) during 2.0? (Word test programmed on tapes with step distortions below the threshold for step detection, etc.) VI. Other than (la) need we store anything else? What about (a) membrane potential of each cell? (b) variations of M.P. over dendritic tree? (c) local concentrations of serotonin, norepinephrine, etc.? (d) previous history of firings for how long before chosen 1/2hour period? (e) blood levels of critical substances? (f) glial activities and concentration of substances? VII. Other than 1b need we control anything else? (See VI list of factors.) VIII. Are 1a and 1b enough to specify and control, or does molecular signal storage introduce a measure of control independent of neuron firing? IX. Does such detailed control of neuron firing give control of (a) program level and (b) metaprogram level, or is there another set of controlling variables and parameters? X. Does this proposed system give control of (a) selfmetaprogram and (b) supraselfmetaprogram levels? Does this system function as an absolute supraselfmetaprogram?15. Metaprogramming the Body Image Some of the most deeply entrenched and earliest acquired metaprograms are those of the personal body image of the human biocomputer. Among the programs of importance here are those of posture, walking stance, sitting patterns, lying down patterns and body posture during sleep. This metaprogramming interdigitates with that for acquired muscular skills of every sort, including writing, running, skiing, sports such as tennis, swimming, and so forth. These metaprograms also interdigitate with those of the use of the body during highly emotional states such as angry outbursts, sexual activities (both alone and with a partner), fright and flight patterns, and so forth. The selfmetaprogram feeds back on itself through the external body image seen in a mirror and through proprioceptive and postural feedbacks. To investigate the proprioceptive and muscle tension aspects of the body image requires deep probing of programs combined with attempts to push every joint of the body beyond the limitations set by the current selfmetaprogram. During such maneuvers to increase the range of motion at specific joints, one quickly discovers the joint capsules and muscles themselves have assumed anatomical limits which attenuate the range of possible motion at these joints. This is particularly true of the spinal joints and the pelvic joints (with the

spine and with the femur). Similar considerations apply to the rib cage and the thoracic spine, the cirvical spine, as well as, the limb joints. By daily repeated regimes of reprogramming of the muscles and the 109 110 joints, it is possible to begin to modify these entrenched programs. During the primary state of LSD* it is possible to program in positive system activity during such exercises. Under these conditions the net effect of such stretchings and muscle exercises can be a positive system excitation and reinforcement of the new patterns. During the LSD state it has been noticed that the activities of the negative systems are attenuated and thus allow a greater range of muscle and joint stretching than without the LSD. It has also been noticed that it is possible to contract the desired muscles more fully in this state than during the usual state. Caution must be observed, however, because it is now possible to contract muscles to the point where muscles, joint capsules, ligaments, and tendons can be strained leaving residual, unpleasant local pains after the LSD primary state is ended. During such exercises in the LSD state, it is possible to detect (by looking at the body image in a mirror during such exercises) the supraselfmetaprograms for the body image, both the positive and the negative ones. One can see the negative metaprogram, for example, as the projection of an aged and crippled body assumed to be too old to be capable of changing the body image. A positive projected metaprogram for example is that of an athletic young figure. Certain kinds of negative attenuation and zeroingout metaprograms are connected with pelvic movements. If there is a supraselfmetaprogram directed against the movements of sexual intercourse, these are reflected in body posture and in the range of use of the pelvis in other activities. Such metaprograms can be detected in the projected images (placed upon the mirror image of the body itself) by watching the posture of the projected *Experiments with dextroamphetamine in doses from 40200 mgs show similar positively reinforcing pleasurable use of muscles, joints, posture-changes, etc., and inhibition of negatively reinforcing painful effects for several hours.111 image and the range of programmable functional movements of the pelvis. The imagined dangers of sexual mating can be seen by the failure of this set of images to go through the full ranges of such motions. Reprogramming such antimetaprograms requires the real body to go through the "forbidden" movements in order to investigate the antimetaprograms. In general this requires more or less extreme exaggeration of the real body rnovements in order to break through the inhibitory aspects of the undesired metaprogram. Each individual will vary from others in the essential details, even as their