manipulation and control of one's own programs and its rather dramatic presentation to one's self is apparently not achievable outside of the use of LSD25. This amount of control can be said to resemble other ways of achieving control and visual projection but in actual intensity I know of no other way to achieve it. Hypnosis is a possible exception. In some cases during the eight or so possible hours of the special states of consciousness achievable with the help of LSD25, the use of visually projected images to aid in seeing the nature of one's own defensive, evasive, and idealization mechanisms can be realized. By means of a mirror for the careful inspection of the body in the external reality (the whole body or the face alone) it is possible to induce a special state of consciousness (or a special program or metaprogram in the use of perception circuitry) in which remembered or unconsciously stored images of self or of others appear on or in place of the body image. Such stored images can be selected within certain limits, manipulated within other limits, or allowed to occur in a freeassociation context, appearing as parallels of the current thoughtstream. The orders to self for the appearance of these phenomena may resemble the posthypnotic suggestion instructions given during autohypnosis, the metaprogrammatic instructions to a very large computer for a certain type of display program with special content to be displayed, and the orders to a large organization to produce a play with many actors operating in one place in space, one after the other, each with an assigned role not necessarily specified in detail. For periods of 30 or so minutes of objective time such projections can be maintained and worked with in the selfanalysis context; at the end of this timeinterval some fatigue is noted with subsequent stopping of the display. Reevocation can be achieved by a period of rest from this and similar tasks for a period of 15 minutes objective time. Several such periods can be evoked during a single session. Areas of unconsciously operating taboos, denials and inhibi-21 tions are revealed (in negative, as it were) by the absence of appearance of the consciously desired and ordered projections in certain areas. Areas of unconscious elaboration show as projections of great detail and completeness even though no real remembered reality could possibly correspond to the projection. Screen memories (Bertram Lewin, et al.) show in great profusion. As the buried material behind the screen is uncovered, the screen memory disappears. An apparent defensive maneuver is the flickering images phenomena; the new images come at such a rapid rate (2 or 3 per objective second) like a slowed flickering movie that one cannot inspect any one image long enough to recognize its significance. Another alleged evasion is the melting, or mosaic, or distortion maneuver in which images flow in whole or plastically, or are broken up into parts like a mosaic, or parts are interchanged among several stored images at different levels. The melting, mosaic or distortion of course can be programmed, of itself, under direct orders. It is only considered an evasion when it is not under the control of the self.

The current affect and its modulation by conscious wishing is immediately shown on the facial expression of the projection despite a lack of change in the objective face itself (proprioceptively, photographically, etc., detected). The projected face and the real face fit together in three dimensions. It is almost as if the perception systems were using the real face and recomputing it to give a different appearance, i.e., if the real face is held neutral then the projected face will manipulate the apparent features of the real face with accurate showing of anger, joy, sexual desire, hatred, jealousy, pleasure, pain, fear, psychic mutilation of ego, adoration of self, and several other such emotions. These have been studied by their mirrorprojections. Conflicts can be projected in several ways: the images switch rapidly back and forth between the two conflicting categories, emotions, orders, persons, ideals, or other. Alternatively, parts (disparate parts) of the internalized argument are projected side by side, giving a peculiar stereoscopic depthinconflict appearance to the display. Profound fatigue shows by showing aged or diseased splotchy images. The negative operations which prevent certain contents reaching access to the display mechanism can be shown to exist by using alternate "acceptabletotheegoideal" routes to the display program and its projection. For example, material which cannot be projected onto one's own mirrored image, sometimes can be projected onto a color picture of someone else. In some cases the other person in the picture is most suitably and acceptably of the opposite sex (face alone, full body clothed, or unclothed) for the full use of the display of the desired material. In the proper circumstances a properly selected real person can also serve as the external reality threedimensional screen onto which material can be projected. This latter "screen" is not a passive one and may say or do something on its own which either changes the projection or invokes a new program (such as the demanding external reality program) which may abolish the whole phenomenon of projection in the visual display itself. When one sees a visual projection onto the face of another person of, say, one's true deeper feelings, the realization may come that this happens to one all the time below the levels of awareness without the special powers attributable to this substance; i.e., there is an already prepared unconscious "display" (which is here allowed access to the visual mechanism by the special conditions) which normally operates in the external reality program with other persons unconsciously or preconsciously. This firsttime finding can have therapeutic benefits in the consequent selfanalysis of one's human relations.23 CORPOREAL FACE One interesting kind of a projection onto the image of one's own whole body (or onto the real body of another) is the phenomenon of the selfcreation of the corporeal face. In this phenomenon, one sees a face of a "monstrous being" whose projected features are made up on the following real body parts: the real shoulders become the "top of head,"