selfmetaprograms which are now modified in the inner perception as if external reality equivalents. This transform, this special mental state, to be appreciated must be experienced directly. In one's ordinary experience there are dreams which have something of this quality and which show this kind of a phenomenon. At this level various evasions of realization of what is happening can take place. One can "imagine" that one is traveling through the real universe past suns, galaxies, etc. One can "imagine" that one is communicating with other beings in these other universes.33 However, scientifically speaking, it is fairly obvious that one is not doing any of these things and that one's basic beliefs determine what one experiences here. Therefore we say that the ordinary perception spaces, the ordinary projection spaces, are now filled with cognition and conation processes. This seems to be a more reasonable point of view to take than the oceanic feeling, the at oneness with the universe as fusing with Universal Mind as reported in the literature by others for these phenomena. These states (or direct perceptions of reality as they have been called) are one's thought and feeling expanding into the circuitry in one's computer usually occupied by perception of external reality in each and every mode, including vision, audition, proprioception, etc. A small digression here for purposes of clarifying problems of experiencing these phenomena In addition to the above discussed factors about fears preventing these phenomena from developing, one must also neutralize various clinical psychiatric explanations and judgments about these phenomena. If one assumes that going through these phenomena is a dangerous procedure in that one might become enamoured of them and hence get into an irreversible psychosis, one also can be kept from experiencing these phenomena directly. Since the real necessary and sufficient conditions for the induction of a psychosis are not yet understood, one should not jump to the conclusion that these phenomena themselves are or can cause a psychosis. This has yet to be proven to the satisfaction of everyone in the field. It may be that professional fear is preventing our further analysis of these phenomena. The whole issue of insight into one's own mental processes, the whole issue of selfdiscipline and inspecting and understanding these processes are at stake here. Those who believe that there is a psychosis impending in all normal people (including professionals) have definite troubles with these kinds of phenomena. Heuristically such beliefs are untenable; such beliefs tend to weaken one's selfdiscipline under these circum-34 stances and make one rather unfit for such experiences. A satisfactory analysis of the clinical psychiatric judgments sphere must take place in all trained subjects before proceeding further. Unless one can move philosophically and scientifically far enough to see the utility of going through these experiences there can be a rapid withdrawal, a faulting out of self from the whole project. One is not willing to undergo the phantasy "dangers" that one

sets up ahead of time before going through the experiences. One's fears in this sphere are usually around the questions of whether one will maintain insight into these processes once one has exposed one's self to LSD25. Candidly considered one may ask may not this substance under these conditions change my brain and mind structure irreversibly out of my control? The proper controls on whether or not there are permanent changes in brains have not been done on animals' nor on humans' brains. So there definitely is a risk in this area. Is one willing to gamble on this particular risk? It is wise to face up to these questions candidly, honestly, and ruthlessly. One is moving into an area which is filled with unknowns of primary importance. The issue of brain and mind injury is a current and important issue which has not been faced by the enthusiasts for LSD25. It is an issue constantly raised by those who are opposed to the use of LSD25. The science of finding out whether or not there is any truth in either side (pro or con) is lacking. The pro LSDgroup tries to do spectacular things using it. The congroup looks askance at the enthusiasm of the other group and claims that they have lost their insight and are hedonistically overvaluing the effects experienced subjectively. The contragroup tend to claim brain damage and/or mind damage; the progroup tends to claim basic understanding of the mind, a new understanding of mental diseases, and a new approach to the psychotherapy of recalcitrant diseases such as alcoholism. (I leave out here the artistic, religious, and philo-35 sophical claims.) (See Leary, Alpert and Metzner, 1964.) The turning point between the pros and cons of the use of LSD25 hinges once more philosophically at the edge of this cognitiveconative projection space phenomena: does one lose one's insight and initiative by going here? This question should be asked and answered scientifically and experimentally. PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS As a pragmatic matter one should do selfanalysis in the severely attenuated physical reality without LSD25 for several exposures before using the substance. One must learn not only to tolerate but to like the experience for several hours at a time. One's fears of the unreleased unconscious programming can be attenuated and analyzed during this period. Training sessions with LSD25 with another person must be done before it is combined with the profound physical isolation and solitude. During this period training by the external screens and the projections can be done with doses of LSD25 from 100 micrograms minimum to the tolerated maximum of that individual. During this period one must face the fears of LSD25 itself and the fears mentioned above of damage to one's brain and one's mind by this agent. One must also face the hedonistic, narcissistic pleasure induction and maintenance possible with LSD25, and one must make one's own decision about how to handle these pleasures versus those which are brought about in the external reality.