rnetaprograms vary. A certain willingness to experience that which is feared most is absolutely essential as a basic metaprogram in order to achieve the new programming. Cautions, once again, are in order here to avoid the narcissistic-selfworshippingevasion of reprogramming in this area. The new areas of experience opened up can be rather seductive of themselves, because of the enhanced positive system activity during the LSD state. The necessity for regression and regrowth from times at which the natural developments were stopped can lead to further sticking of the metaprogramming at an earlier age on hedonistic grounds. Additional supraselfmetaprograms insisting on a natural evolution of the selfmetaprogram towards a desired set of ideal metaprograms is necessary here to assure progress. In older persons with welldeveloped characters these dangers are not as pressing as they are in younger subjects. However, the selfmetaprograms involving the body image are also more entrenched in the older persons. More energy and dedication to the task at hand are needed in the older persons. In those in whom obesity has become a problem, it is necessary to reduce the body weight to a more ideal level while these exercises in remetaprogramming of the body image are being carried out. In other words, it is necessary to carry out those real dietary and exercise instructions which lead to a real externally better body in the sense of physical health. Such a regime can reduce the probability of the onset of the typical 112 diseases of old age, and with increasing health and activity, the remetaprogramming becomes more rewarding. One metaprogram which has been worked out in great detail which may be of help to some persons is the set of exercises and dietary rules commonly called Yoga. These exercises assure new areas of stretching and new areas of breathing exercises which can enhance the physiologic functions of lungs and gut tract, as well as somatic musculature, joints, bones, and posture. In many ways these exercises assure adequate massage of the heart and blood vessels in such a way as to increase their activity along healthy lines. It may be that one can reduce the probability of a coronary attack, angina pectoris, and similar problems of the aged. Obviously other organs are also participating including liver, kidneys, spleen, and so forth. In obesity the panniculus adiposus, the large fat store in the omentum and in the mesentery, severely limit functions of all of the viscera and limit the amount of stimulation that can be given these organs through such exercise. Such large fat reservoirs also require very large amounts of circulation of their own and hence require an increase in blood pressure to force that circulation. Thus the external changes in the body image arereflected in internal changes throughout the body, in a selfreinforcing manner.16

Brain Models TABLE 1 VIEWS OF ORGANISM: MODELS 1. Physicalchemical to quantum mechanical 2. Physiological (structure and function) 3. Modern psychological (behavior) 4. Classical psychological (psyche) 5. Evolutionary (origins of life and species) 6. Social, anthropological (prehistorical, historical, current) 7. Nonhuman intelligences 8. Religious, mystical (suprahuman entities) TABLE 2 VIEWS OF ORGANISM: MODELS 1. Physicalchemical: series of millisecond to microsecond frozen micropictures of patterns of neuronal activity, biochemical reserves, physicalchemical flows, energyforcematerial exchange with outside sourcessinks; repeatability, reliability, signal/noise relations. 2. Physiological: partial integratedovertime pictures of physical patterns: net results over seconds to days to years. Organism vs. environment generation of actions, signals. 3. Modern psychological: selection of certain aspects of 113 114 physical physiological data and models which show properties of modifiability, CNS model making, model comparison, storage, learning, memory, physchophysical . 4. Classical psychological: mental, subjective, inside view, psychoanalytic, solipsistic, egocentered, personal models.

5. Evolutionary: gradual formation of basic physicalchemical units into organic particles, cells, organisms; formation of genetic codes and cytoplasmic orders; increasing sizes of cellular aggregations; formation of species; changes to new species; evolution of CNS; evolution of man from anthropoids; origins of speech. 6. Social, anthropological 7.

TABLE 3

KINDS OF "STIMULI" 1. Physical specifications: endorgans: kind and amount, timing, patterning of energy 2. Physiological specifications: neuronal: threshold values, patterns of neuron excitation (kind, place, impulses/ second) 3. Central nervous system specification: number of excited neurons, where, what impulse frequencies; buildup of central state in what systems, its kind.115 TABLE 4 KINDS OF "RESPONSES" 1. Patterned musculoskeletal: (A) Starting a feedback pattern with apparatus or with another organism (B) Stopping a feedback pattern 2. Patterned CNSbiochemical states generating musculoskeletal responses: (A) Neutral (B) Net rewarding (C) Net punishing (D) Net ambivalent FIGURE 2 116 TABLE 5 KINDS OF CENTRAL STATES ( O ) Sleeping

( 1 ) Neutral ( 2 ) Activated ( 3 ) Inhibited 1. ( 4 ) Rewarding ( 5 ) Punishing ( 6 ) Disinhibited 1. ( 7 ) Integrative ( 8 ) Ambivalent TABLE 6 PLACES IN CNS FOR "CENTRAL STATES 1. Sleep system 2. Afferent projection systems 3. Efferent projection systems 4. Primary activation systems 5. Primary inhibition systems 6. Reward systems 7. Punishment systems 8. Integration systems 9. Pattern storage systems 10. Programming systems TABLE 7 FEEDBACK "CAUSES " IN CENTRAL STATES 1. Patterns of immediate results of outside stimuli (strength, place, timing). 2. Patterns of immediate results of responses. 3. Stored integrated consequences patterns. 4. Continuous current cortical integration of selected past stored patterns and current results of outside stimuli and responses. 5. Cellular biochemical states of storagedepletion of specific substances in specific sites reserves available in body.

6. Specific CNS biochemical states locally. 1. Builtin programs TABLE 8 INTERLOCK: EXTERNAL REALITY PROGRAM Systems 1. Afferent 2. Efferent 3. Reticular modulating _ 4. Positive system phasing 5. Negative system phasing 6. Cortical storage and programming 7. Builtin programs TABLE 9 NARCISSISTIC STATES through electrical stimulation of the brain, drugs, programming, and isolation: basic factors are: 1. Prolonged hyperactivie (+) systems. 2. Hypoactivity () systems. 3. Attenuation of external stimuli, responses, transactions. TABLE 10 "CONVULSIONS" OF ORGASMLIKE TYPE If convulsion (behaviorally seen) includes prolonged hyperactivity of (+) systems, convulsions act as positive reinforcement with increased seeking and repetitions of ways of repeating the experience. (Dostoyevsky, Bickford, Sem-Jacobsen, Lilly). 118

FIGURE 6

A LARGE FRACTION OF THE BRAIN HAS STIMULABLE ELEMENTS WHICH GIVE CONDITIONABLE RESPONSES TO LOCAL ELECTRICAL STIMULATION AT LOW LEVELS 1. NeocortexProjection systems (visual, acoustic, sensorimotor)-present, now 2. PaleoArcheocortexfixed, old patterns 3. Striatemixed projection, positivenegative 4. Hypothalamusseptum and mesencephalon positive and negativepresent FIGURE 7 MOTIVATIONAL HIERARCHY OF CNS INSTRUCTIONS (BRADY) Most (+) Lat. Hypothalamus Ant. Med. Forebrain Bundle Orbitofrontal Cortex Amyagdala (cf. Powell et al.) Least (+) Entorhinal Cortex Neutral (0) Septal Area Negative () Fornix 120

FIGURE 8 Positive (+) & Negative (-) Systems: Short vs. Long Train Effects Positive Neocortexlong Hippocampuslong Amygdalalong Caudate Nshort Lat. Hypothalamic Nshort Med. Forebrain Bundleshort Interpeduncular Nshort Negative Neocortexlong Amygdalalong Intralaminar Thal. Nshort Med. Hypothalamic Nshort Central Grayshort