breakdown of the barriers between the emotionalwordless systems, and the word-filled modeling systems by means of channeled uninhibited feeling and channeled uninhibited action. (This is one way that the unconscious is made conscious in a sometimes too rapid fashion.) If strong enough, the modeling systems (selfmetaprogrammer) can receive the powerful currents of emotion in full force, go along with them, and eventually construct a vigorous operating model consonant with the desired ideal metaprograms but also with emotional power, builtin. If not strong enough, the selfmetaprogrammer can be temporarily overwhelmed by the protohuman survival programs. There is an additional caution in the use of these substances; the selfprogrammer must be strong enough to experience these phenomena and not make difficulttoreverse mistakes in reprogramming or difficulttocorrect errors in new commitments in the external world. This is an area of human activity for the most experienced and strongest personalities, with the right training. I do not recommend the use of these methods except under very controlled and studied conditions with as near ideal as possible physical and social environment and as near ideal as possible help from thoroughly trained empathic matching persons. The subject's shortterm and longterm welfare must control all actions, all speech, and all transactions between each pair of persons present, unconsciously and consciously. 6. Choice of Attending Persons During LSD25 State Used for SelfAnalysis The point is underscored any action, facial appearance, word, sentence, tone of voice, or gesture on the part of the attending person can be used by the person in the LSD25 state in the processes of penetration, elicitation, or reprogramming. Mistakes by the attending person here can have a devastating power and must be scrupulously avoided. Only mature, experienced, previouslyexposed persons should be allowed in the e.r. during this critical time. The minimum possible number (1) of persons is best. This one person should, ideally, have been psychoanalyzed himself and have pursued his selfanalysis with LSD25 aid plus physical isolation and solitude. Short of this ideal, high quality professional psychoanalytic training is a minimum ideal requirement, or careful selection of attending supervisors by such professionals. An exclusion test must be done on any potential attendant or therapist; he or she should have been personally through several LSD25 sessions with the selfanalysis metaprograms as the leading motivating instructions, and have penetrated to and beyond his own buried lethality and hostility. The professional selector should be thoroughly acquainted with such a potential aide, and evaluate the stages through which he or she has passed and achieved "permanently." There can be special cases, less than the above ideal, but consonant with the principles enunciated. Some spouses or lovers (or both) have special understanding and interlocks which 69 70

allow certain kinds of deep penetrations, elicitations and reprogrammings, but not other kinds. If one of the pair has been through LSD25 selfanalysis training, it is possible (in special cases) to help the other member through a session or sessions as a standby monitor and positive loveobject in the external reality. However, there should be some form of professional psychoanalytic control over such sessions. Such controls can vary from being implicit and in the nature of tactical and strategic advisory sessions to being e.r. supervisory, depending on the egostrength and on the current stage of development of each member of the pair. Expert and informed clinical judgment after thorough clinical study is the best (known) instrument for such decisions.7.Behavioral, NonIsolation Replay of Protohuman Programs: The Problem of Repetitive Unconscious Replay Certain kinds of programs in the human computer, usually below the ordinary levels of awareness, are circular. The circularity can be useful and needed, or misused (for example, in the maintenance of disparate and disturbing programs, L. Kubie 1939). A program in a certain patient says "Mother has abandoned baby, run to Daddy; Daddy beats me and leaves; Mommy comforts me and leaves; Daddy loves me and hurts me and leaves. Run to Mommy. Mommy has my sister, loves her, abandons me: run to Daddy; Daddy hurts. Daddy leaves. Run to Mommy. Mommy leaves. . .Mother has abandoned baby, etc." Again and again. When the patient was a baby this was the one important reality program; it became fixed, circular and carried into adulthood. Such a program operates slowly or rapidly, and continuously. In the adult the real situation in the e.r. (external reality) cannot halt the circular program. Usually modeling in the reality is preeminent over such circularity. In this circular case, the e.r. is used to facilitate playback and maintain the strength of this old model program. Any important man or woman in the e.r. must, somehow, be made to fit into this "ancient model" program. An external observer sees a person with such a program repeating an unhappy pattern again and again over the years. The underlying perpetuated baby program is unavailable for inspection, replay and breaking of circularity by the owner as an adult. 71 72 At high doses LSD25 reduces the relative strength of the e.r. program by enhancing the strength of other programs. (This occurs with 200 to 400 micrograms, and starts in the first hour and can continue for four or more hours.) LSD25 can increase the strength of and activate basic models in storage; it also allows the selfmetaprogramming orders (orders stored just before the LSD2 5 maximum effect starts) to be carried out. Strong circular programs if present are likely to be replayed. The selfobserver participates in the replay, but once again is programmed as relatively weak with respect to the replay program as he was as a baby or child at the time of the implanting episodes in the e.r. The