121 FIGURE 1O Single Zones in "Motor" Cortex (Threshold Current, at 30 ma Second Train Durations) *(Noncortical). Muscle response (to 1 pulse)

*"Move ". Muscle response (to train) *"Stop ". Negative reinforcement threshold ("conditioned avoidance ") *"Start ". Positive reinforcement threshold ("selfstimulation") *"Alerting". Conditional stimulus ("detection") FIGURE 11 Subcortical Nuclei "Positive" Zone (Threshold Current (Short Trains)) *"Stop". (Spread to negative zone) muscle movements *"Taming" "Gentling". Autonomic responses * "Start ". Positive reinforcement "Self-stimulation" *"Alerting". Conditional stimulus threshold FIGURE 12 Single Zone in "Negative" Subcortical Nuclei (Threshold Current (Ramp Schedule)) *"Escape" "Anger". Builtin somatic muscle patterns released *"Fear". Autonomic responses *"Stop". Negative reinforcement threshold ("conditioned avoidance") *"Alerting". Conditional stimulus threshold 17 Excerpts from "The Idiot" by Fvodor Dostoyevsky * Examples of Extremely Active PositiveSystem State: Subjective Report, Special Type of Epileptic Seizure. Dostoyevsky in a letter to Nikolai Strakhov.

"For a few moments before the fit", he wrote to the critic Nikolai Strakhov, "I experience a feeling of happiness such as it is quite impossible to imagine in a normal state and which other people have no idea of. I feel entirely in harmony with myself and the whole world, and this feeling is so strong and so delightful that for a few seconds of such bliss one would gladly give up ten years of one's life, if not one's whole life." Prince Leo Nikolayevich Myshkin: "He was thinking, incidentally, that there was a moment or two in his epileptic condition almost before the fit itself (if it occurred during his waking hours) when suddenly amid the sadness, spiritual darkness and depression, his brain seemed to catch pp. 8 and 258. Translated by David Magarshack. Penguin Books Ltd., Harmondsworth, Middlesex, England, 1960. 122123 fire at brief moments, and with an extraordinary momentum his vital forces were strained to the utmost all at once. His sensation of being alive and his awareness increased tenfold at those moments which flashed by like lightning. His mind and heart were flooded by a dazzling light. All his agitation, all his doubts and worries, seemed composed in a twinkling, culminating in a great calm, full of serene and harmonious joy and hope, full of understanding and the knowledge of the final cause. But those moments, those flashes of intuition, were merely the presentiment of the last second (never more than a second) which preceded the actual fit. This second was, of course, unendurable. Reflecting about that moment afterwards, when he was well again, he often said to himself that all those gleams and flashes of the highest awareness and, hence, also of 'the highest mode of existence', were nothing but a disease, a departure from the normal condition, and, if so, it was not at all the highest mode of existence, but, on the contrary, must be considered to be the lowest. And yet he arrived at last at the paradoxical conclusion: 'What does it matter that it is an abnormal tension, if the result, if the moment of sensation, remembered and analyzed in a state of health, turns out to be harmony and beauty brought to their highest point of perfection, and gives a feeling, undivined and undreamt of till then, of completeness, proportion, reconciliation, and an ecstatic and prayerful fusion in the highest synthesis of life?' These vague expressions seemed to him very comprehensible, though rather weak. But that it really was 'beauty and prayer', that it really was 'the highest synthesis of life', he could not 124 doubt, nor even admit the possibility of doubt. For it was not abnormal and fantastic visions he saw at that moment7 as under the influence of hashish, opium7 or spirits7 which debased the reason and distorted the mind. He could reason sanely about it when the attack was over and he was well again. Those moments were merely an intense

heightening of awareness-if this condition had to be expressed in one word-of awareness and at the same time of the most direct sensation of one7s own existence to the most intense degree. If in that second-that is to say7 at the last conscious moment before the fit -he had time to say to himself7 consciously and clearly7 'Yes7 I could give my whole life for this moment,' then this moment by itself was, of course7 worth the whole of life. However7 he did not insist on the dialectical part of his argument: stupor7 spiritual darkness7 idiocy stood before him as the plain consequence of those 'highest moments7. Seriously, of course, he would not have argued the point. There was, no doubt, some flaw in his argument-that is, in his appraisal of that minute-but the reality of the sensation somewhat troubled him all the same. What indeed was he to make of this reality? For the very thing had happened. He had had time to say to himself at the particular second that7 for the infinite happiness he had felt in it7 it might well be worth the whole of his life. 'At that moment77 he once told Rogozhin in Moscow during their meetings there7 'at that moment the extraordinary saying that there shall be time no longer becomes7 somehow, comprehensible to me. I suppose,7 he added, smiling, 'this is the very second in which there was not time enough for the water from 125 the pitcher of the epileptic Mahomet to spill7 while he had plenty of time in that very second to behold all the dwellings of Allah.77 Summary Some general ideas from extrapolation and reworking of modern general purpose computer theory are used to explain and to control some of the subjective aspects of the operations of the human brain. An addition (for the peculiarly human brain) to the theory of the generalpurpose computers is the concept of the selfmetaprogram or the internal programmer present in the 10^10 neurons assembly known as the human brain. The selfmetaprograms operate between the huge storage and the huge external reality. Selfprogramming properties (in addition to stored program properties) are essential to understanding mental operations and resulting external general purpose behaviors such as speech and language. Stored programs and metaprograms are characteristic of the human. The selforganizing aspects of computer programming and programs are now conceptually reasonable and realizable in modern nonbiological computers. The human brain, a superbiocomputer, as it were, is a parallel processor-a realizable artificial machine with this structure has not yet been built. The actions of certain substances on the brain are explicable by this theory: examination of stored programs and reprogramming are opened by LSD25 (possibly by the introduction of small amounts of programmatic randomness, noise). In the child, automatic metaprogram implantation (or externally forced metaprogramming), persisting as metaprograms below the levels of 126127