concepts, evasion is defined as any program or metaprogram entered upon to avoid, to hide, or to distort a deeper program or metaprogram which is too seductive or too threatening or too chaotic for the selfprogrammer at that particular time. At the beginning in the profound isolation situation many people experience a fear which is an almost disembodied fear with no referents in the external reality. With experience this fear can be shown to be a fear of one's own inner unknowns. After a thorough exploration of the various evasive metaprograms, it can be shown that the only thing to fear in this area is fear itself, in overwhelming amounts. With sufficient training it can be shown that one can convert the motivational sign of the experienced emotion from negative to positive. As to whether or not one must go through some of the negative emoting in order to experience enough of the punishing aspects to avoid them is a moot point. A great deal of selfdiscipline is required in this instance to pursue the negatively tinged programs and metaprograms stored in memory. At times one can detect an almost hedonistic withdrawal from further consideration of unpleasant events and memories. These evasions into pleasure are also evasions of further selfanalysis. As one clears up more and more27 areas of unpleasant programs and metaprograms, the increasing amounts of pleasurable programming and metaprogramming and their control can become a very seductive evasion of one's ideal of selfanalysis. It is at this point that too frequent exposure to these conditions must be avoided. Long periods of interlock with the external reality must then be done. Sometimes this may necessitate months of outside work to integrate one's findings with the real world as one has chosen to live in it. The easily evoked pleasure of the LSD25 state may become for some persons a major goal. To make sure that one does not get seduced by this induced state of pleasure it is wise to avoid further experiments for several weeks or several months, and reassert the natural accesses to pleasure in one's external reality. The external reality struggle to obtain pleasure from the environment has rules of its own which must be met realistically and with intelligence and balance. Here it is obvious that discipline in the selfmetaprogrammer is absolutely essential. Further progress in selfanalysis cannot be made without selfdiscipline. With this caution let us return to the profound isolation situation. In the zero level external reality situation the use of any external reality screen can be defined as a defensive maneuver to avoid visualizing or experiencing what one fears most in the deeper levels of one's computer, i.e., in the unconscious. The uses of the screens are necessary and useful steps on the way in and are useful steps to return to for confirmation at later times of the findings. An apparently paradoxical situation thus exists in the profound physical isolation situation. One is pursuing selfanalysis and accesses to the keys to pleasure within one's self and keys to lessening the pain and fear in one's self. However, once one has unlocked the pleasure and attenuated the pain one must use the

resulting released energies and attach them somehow to the external reality programs and the ideals (supraself-metaprograms) which one has set up. One does not dissipate all 28 of this pleasure in hedonistic and narcissistic gratification. One of the pitfalls of LSD25 experiences is exactly this: one has the power now to stay in an expanded state of pleasure, as it were, for several hours. This can become quite seductive and one can become quite lazy and return to this state at every opportunity. However this is not selfanalysis, this state is the ecstasy, or bliss, or transcendent state sought by the religious proponents of the use of LSD25 for religious purposes. These findings are very similar if not identical to those found in classical psychoanalysis. Once repressions and denials are released during the analysis, the access of pleasurable activity increases rapidly. The same temptations exist to become a pleasureseeking organism; however, this tendency too must be analyzed in the classical situation. When one compares the classical analytical situation to the solitudinous selfanalysis situation one must be quite aware of what has been sacrificed in each case. The advantage of the external analyst being present listening to one producing the material is that one avoids some of the pitfalls of solitude in that some of the above evasions can be pointed out rapidly before one became too involved in them. On the other hand the interpretations of the analyst can be a distraction from pursuing in depth certain aspects of one's own selfanalysis. Even solitudinous selfanalysis using LSD25 should be referred back to an external analyst at times when large amounts of powerfully acting unconscious programs have been unearthed. Some programs tend to be acted out after profound solitude and isolation experiences, as well as they do during classical analysis. This is one of the risks and the gambles of this technique. This is why one is cautioned to use subjects who have become sophisticated with regard to psychoanalysis itself. During one's classical psychoanalysis one begins to modify one's computer and the selfprogrammer to include many aspects of the methods of computation that one's analyst uses. One29 accumulates as it were a metaprogram of selfanalysis which incorporates a good deal of what one's analyst has to offer with regard to one's own computer. In classical psychoanalytic terms one tends to incorporate many aspects of one's analyst. Once one has a satisfactorily functioning internal analyst, i.e., an analytical metaprogram for the selfmetaprogram, one can be launched on one's own and no longer needs the external analyst to the same degree that one did earlier. One's analysis has proceeded from the analyst outside to the analyst inside. An analogous situation can be seen in the profound isolation and LSD2 5 analysis. The foregoing descriptions of the external screens and external projection methods emphasize the relationship between the computer and the external reality. It also emphasized that the computer was using certain parts of itself for transformations and projections of data