In the complete physical absence of other external computers within the critical interlock distance, the selfdirected and otherdirected programs can be clearly detected, analyzed, recomputed, and reprogrammed, and new metaprograms initiated by the solitudinous computer itself. In this physical reality (which is as completely attenuated as possible environment with solitude), maximum intensity, maximum complexity, and maximum speed of reprogramming are achievable by the self. In the field of scientific research, such a computer can function in many different waysfrom the pure, austere thought processes of theory and mathematics to the almost random data absorption of the naturalistic approach with newlyfound systems, or to the coordinated interlock with other human computers of an engineering effort. At least two extreme major techniques of datacollection analysis exist for individual scientists ( 1 ) artificially created, controlledelement, invented, devisedsystem methods; and (2) methods involving the participant-observer, who interacts intimately and experientially with naturally given elements, with nonhuman or human computers as parts of the system. The former is the current basis of individual physicalchemical research; the latter is one basis for individual explorative, firstdiscovery research of organisms having brains larger than those of humans. Sets of human motivational procedural postulates for the interlock research method on nonhuman beings, with computers as large as and larger than the human computers, are sought. Some of these methods involve the establishment of long periods-perhaps months or years-of human to other organism computer interlock. It is hoped that this interlock will be of a quality and value sufficiently high to permit interspecies communication efforts on both sides on an intense, highly structured level. The chemical agent Iysergic acid diethylamide (LSD25) has been shown by many investigators to cause large changes in the modes of functioning of the human biocomputer. The dosage to obtain various effects ranges from 25 to 1000 micrograms per subject per session. The detectable primary effects have a time course, a latency of 2040 minutes, from time of administration and endure for 4 to 12 hours for single or divided doses, with a peak effect at 2 to 3 hours. At the same dose level, such effects cannot be repeated for 72 to 144 hours. Detectable secondary and tertiary effects have a longer time course. With sufficiently sensitive testing techniques, secondary effects with halflife of 1 week to 6 weeks have been described. Tertiary effects can be detected for 1 to 2 years. The descriptions in the literature of the primary effects vary considerably. The frameworks of these descriptions show a great variety of phenomenological, philosophical, medical, psychiatric, psychological, social and religious conceptualizations. Published mechanisms and models of the 160

phenomena are found to be unsatisfactory. Published experiments resulting from the use of these models are also not satisfactory. As a result of this dissatisfaction with published materials, a new model was constructed the human biocomputer. Interactive experiments were designed to test this model with LSD25 sessions. The subject was preprogrammed with the general concepts of the model over several months before the first session, and with specific programs to be tested 12 hours to one hour before each session. During separate sessions (100400 micrograms dose range), programming was done (a) by self, (b) written instructions, (c) taped instructions, (d) environmental control and (e) one other person. Results were dictated during some sessions or transcribed immediately after each session; followup analyses were similarly recorded for periods up to several months. Modifications of the model were made as the necessity arose during the longterm analyses, and introduced in each later session as specific instructions. The model is one that continues to evolve in as general purpose and openended a way as is possible for this investigator. This account gives a report of the current state of this model of the human biocomputer, some of the properties found, the programming and metaprogramming done, the concepts evolved, the special isolationsolitude environment, and special metaprogramming techniques developed. Communication Research Institute Scientific Report No. CR10167