Among many possible theoretical approaches is one which I call the "participant theorist" approach. The theorist establishes an interlock with a nonhuman computer by whatever modes are possible, programs himself with openended hypotheses of a type thought to encourage him and to encourage the other computer, each to communicate. The resulting interactions between the two computers set up new programs, driven by metaprograms which say establish communication with the other computer. The new theory develops with the new data as each evolves in feedback with the other. Corrections are introduced in context almost automatically by rewardpunishment interactions in response to errors on each side of the dyad. OBSERVATIONS WITH TURSIOPSHUMAN INTERLOCK: MIMICRY AS EVIDENCE OF INTERLOCK It has been found [with one nonhuman species (Tursiops truncatus) with a brain known to be sufficiently large to motivate the human end adequately] that a large daily commitment of hours to interlock is necessary for the human end, the order of 16 to 20 hours of the 24. The days per week must be at least five, and preferably six or seven. After 11 weeks of these hours, an approximate total of 1000 hours of interlock, the communication achieved via nonvocal and vocal channels was quite complex, and at the human end, the theories quite new and operationally successful, from an ordertakeorders level to several higher levels.* With dedicated interlock the consciousunconscious reciprocal models of each computer in the other become workable within *Lilly, J. C. 1967; Lilly, J. C., Alice M. Miller and Henry M. Truby, 1968. l. A. S. A. 43: 14121424.97 the limits inherent in each participant. The limits set are also consciousunconscious, at the human end, at least. Such interlock participation and realistic model building and rebuilding avoid the sterile purity of the approach from the armchair. It assures interlock in most areas, including some interlock even in those areas forbidden to western "civilized man." The total necessities in each mode of expression are presented irrespective of taboos, inhibitions, bad theories, and blocks in either species. Areas to be loosened up are indicated unequivocally by each member of the dyad to the other by powerful methods. If communication attempts by one side are blocked in one area by the other, in many cases search tactics are employed until an open channel is found or until a channel is developed suitable to each end. Early in the interlock, mutual rules are established regulating the muscle power and force to be used, and areas considered dangerous, the "absolutely" forbidden areas, the first channels to be considered, the limitations on the use of each channel, who is to have the initiative under what conditions, the contingencies surrounding feeding and eating,

around sexual activities, arriving and leaving, sleeping, urination and defecation, the introduction of additional members of either species, and the use of props and evasions. The initial phase consumes most of this initial 1000 hours of interlock. The consciousnessunconsciousness aspect of the initial period of interlock is an important consideration: if too much hostility-fear is present unconsciously the interlock becomes ritualistic and evasive. If the human end has too much unconscious energy involved in unconscious circuits of dependence on humans of the motherchildfather variety, fearhostility may rupture the interlock suddenly. If powerful means of clearing out the unconscious excessbaggage circuits are used, one sees a sudden access to interlock of a depth and energy previously lacking in that human. A sudden willingness to participate at all levels 98 effectively is generated and used as the computer is cleared of of unreasonable circular feedback programs below the level of awareness. This is at the human end of the system. At the otherspecies end of the system, the selection of individuals for interlock is more hit or miss. We catch dolphins in the wild; we don't know how they select (if they do select) the group for us to catch. There seems to be some selection going on: most of the individuals we have worked with have none of our unconscioushostility, unconsciousfear programs in their computers; at least not in the hands of our people in the Institute. * Rarely are very old ones caught. It may be that dolphins in general cannot afford waste of the unconscious circuitry for such useless programs as hostilityfear-tointelligentotherindividuals. The conditions for their survival in the wild require the utmost in fast and unequivocal cooperation and interlock with one another. The exigencies of airbreathing, of sharks, of storms, of bacterial diseases, of viral illnesses, of man's depredations, and of other factors require exuberance and wholehearted participation (intraspecies) from each and every individual. Failure to interlock because of fear, hostility or other inner preoccupations leads to quick death and nonpropagation of that type of computer. Dolphins, correctly approached, seek interlock with those humans who are secure enough to openly seek them (at all levels) in the sea water. With dolphins there are possible and probable interlock channels for humans. Anatomical differences limit the channels, as do human social taboos. Given a human with minimal inhibitions, the necessary sensitivity, skills in the water, courage, dedication, correct programming, and the necessary surrounds and support, there are many channels: soundproductionhearing; muscular actiontactilepressurereception; presenceactionseeing; sexual *Communication Research Institute, Miami, Florida and St. Thomas, U. S. Virgin Islands.99