He went away from these rooms into other universes and other spaces and left the computer to work out solutions below his levels of awareness. Later with higher motivational energy the subject returned to the problem of the lock, the doors and the rooms somewhat refreshed by the experiences in the other realms. Mathematical transformations were next tried in the approach to the locked rooms. The concept of the key fitting into the lock and the necessity of finding the key were abandoned and the rooms were approached as topological puzzles. In the multi56 dimensional cognitional and visual space the rooms were now manipulated without the necessity of the key in the lock. Using the transitional concept that the lock is a hole in the door through which one can exert an effort for a topological transformation, one could turn the room into another topological form other than a closed box. The room in effect was turned inside out through the hole, through the lock leaving the contents outside and the room now a collapsed balloon placed farther from the selfmetaprogrammer. Room after room was thus defined as turned inside out with the contents spewed forth for use by the selfmetaprogrammer. Once this control key worked, it continued automatically to its own limits. With this sort of an "intellectual crutch," as it were, entire new areas of basic beliefs were entered upon. Most of the rooms which before had appeared as strong rooms with big powerful walls, doors, and locks now ended up as empty balloons. The greatly defended contents of the rooms in many cases turned out to be relatively trivial programs and episodes from childhood which had been overgeneralized and overvalued by this particular human computer. The devaluation of the general purpose properties of the human biocomputer was one such room. In childhood the many episodes which led to the selfmetaprogrammer not remaining general purpose but becoming more and more limited and specialized were entered upon. Several layers of the supraselfmetaprograms laid down in childhood were opened up. The mathematical operation which took place in the computer was the movement of energies and masses of data from the supraselfmetaprogram down to the selfmetaprogrammatic level and below. At the same time there was the knowledge that programmatic materials had been moved from the supraselfposition to the underselfcontrolled position at the programmatic level. These operations were all filed in metaprogram storage under the title "The key is no key." 57 It was noticed that the necessity for locks and for keys in the real world had to be dealt with. There was an interval of time in which the subject was quite willing to throw all of

his keys away and keep all of the real doors of his life unlocked. That was tried briefly and resulted in a theft. This immediately brought home the obvious fact that the external reality programs cannot be controlled by the selfmetaprogram. There are other human biocomputers and a real external reality which has unpredictable properties not under the control of the selfmetaprogrammer. Therefore there must remain in the supraselfmetaprogram certain rules for conduct of the human computer in the external reality. There must remain a certain modicum of real supraself control and respect for the external reality's part of the supraselfmetaprogram . As it was stated elsewhere (Lilly, 1956, Lilly and Shurley, 1960): the province of the mind is the only area of science in which what one believes to be true either is true or becomes true within limits to be determined experimentally. This particular subject saw that the key is no key is a private selfmetaprogramming language phrase and should not be applied to the external reality metaprogram nor should it be applied to other human biocomputers (at least without careful consideration of their capabilities and their own supraselfmetaprograms). As it were similar topological transformations under control of the self-metaprogrammer may not yet have developed within the given other person. The kinds of phenomena expressed by this unique private human computer (The key is no key) may be totally inapplicable to others. Metatheoretically considered, however, the above operation can be reexpressed by a given individual and elaborated and differentiated along other coordinates. For those willing to try these experiments I wish to add a suggestion: It is necessary to explore all aspects of one's body image, one's childish emotional regions, one's real body in various states and with special stimuli58 in addition to those from the body itself. With such explorative training one can do topological transformations which can result in stepwise changes in metaprogramming and in metaprograms themselves. Bias, prejudice, preconception and intransigence in explicit areas are seen as supraselfmetaprograms which are inappropriate. Until there can be highly motivated mathematical transformations within the areas of control metaprograms, major changes are not made. The above alltoocondensed summary of these experiments and their results illustrates the linguistic symbolization of mathematical operations; this operation offers a certain kind of shorthand to the human computer. Linguistic symbols can be used for storing symbols which represent whole areas of operations in the computer. The key is no key is a version of the actual operations which it symbolizes. The statement is in the language of the child as the young computer originally stored it. The actual operations taking place in the adult symbolized by the key is no key are a complex rendering of more advanced ideas, some of which are circuitlike, some of which are topological transformations and some of which are in multidimensional matrices. A given human computer is limited in its operations by its own acquired mathematical conceptual machinery; this is part of its supraselfmetaprograms. Maximum control over the metaprogrammatic level by the selfmetaprogram is achieved