external observer then sees a dramatic, repeat performance, again and again, of new replays. Each replay is slightly different and gives the outside observer the feeling of a circular course not quite exactly repeating each time. The emotion expressed at first has all the desperate panic of the child; gradually the spectrum of intense emotion can be experienced and expressed progressively. With proper e.r., personnel, and responses from them, progress leads the circle gradually out of negative feelings into the regions of good feelings; the fear and other negative emotions are stripped off the circular program; good feelings are attached to replay; the self finally can see it operate with its new emotion and (possibly for the first time) examine its newly charged (positive) structure as it replays; reduce its importance on the unconscious priority list; and file it as a relic of childhood in the (inoperative or weakly operating) "history" file. For a time, the self then feels free, cleaned out. The strength gained can be immense; the energy freed is double: the fight with the circular program is temporarily gone. Not only is the energy of self no longer absorbed in the fight but new program energy is available. For a short time, energy taken from the old circular program and the energy formerly expended in the fight may be available. So twice the energy of the circular program 73 can be made available for use by the selfmetaprogram in constructing new energy relations between desired programs directed toward ideals, aims, and goals. Adult love and sharing consonant with aspirations and reality (outside) gain strength and gain differentiation of response and of interlocks. Humor appears in abundance, good humor. Beauty is enhanced, the bodily appearance becomes youthful, with increased smiles and goodnatured puns and jokings at a deep level of understanding and perspective. The babyish and the childish aspects of self are converted to adulthood with great strength of character, integrity, and loving. These positive effects can last as long as two to four weeks before reassertion of the old program takes place. FIGURE 1. SCHEMA OF THE LEVELS OF THE FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION OF THE HUMAN BIOCOMPUTER

Each part of each level has feedbackcontrol relations with each part, indicated by the connecting lines. Each level has feedbackcontrol with each other level. For the sake of schematic simplicity, many of these feedback connections are not shown. One example is an important connection between Levels Vl through IX and X; some builtin, survival programs have a representative at the Supra Self metaprogram Level as follows: "These programs are necessary for survival; do not attenuate or excite them to extreme values; such extremes lead to noncomputed actions, penalties, illness, or death." After construction, such a Metaprogram is transferred by the Selfmetaprogram to the

Supraselfmetaprograms and to the Supraspeciesmetaprograms for future control purposes. (Note: See text and glossary for definitions of terms used.) The boundaries between the body and the external reality are between Levels I and 11; certain energies and materials pass this boundary in special places (heat, light, sound, food, secretions, feces. Boundaries between body and brain are between Levels II and III; special structures pass this boundary (blood vessels, nerve fibers, cerebrospinal fluid). Levels IV through Xl are in the brain circuitry and are the software of the Biocomputer. Levels above Level X are labeled Unknown" for the following purposes: (1) to maintain the openness of the system, (2) to motivate future scientific research, (3) to emphasize the necessity for unknown factors at all levels, (4) to point out the heuristic nature of this schema, (5) to emphasize unwillingness to subscribe to any dogmatic belief without testable reproducible data, and (6) to encourage creative courageous imaginative investigation of unknown influences on and in human realties, inner and outer. 75 8 Basic Effects of LSD25 on the Biocomputer: Noise as the Basic Energy for Projection Techniques In the analysis of the effects of LSD25 on the human mind, a reasonable hypothesis states that the effect of these substances on the human computer is to introduce white noise (in the sense of randomly varying energy containing no signals of itself) in specific systems in the computer. These systems and the partition of the noise among them vary with concentration of substance and with the substance used. One can thus "explain" the apparent speedup of subjective time; the enhancement of colors and detail in perceptions of the real world; the production of illusions; the freedom to make new programs; the appearance of visual projections onto mirror images of the real face and body; the projections and apparent depth in colored and in blackandwhite photos; the projection of emotional expression onto other real persons; the synesthesia of music to visual projections; the feeling of "oneness with the universe"; apparent ESP effects; communications from "beings other than humans"; the lowered Clozeanalysis scores by outside scorers; the clinical judgment of the outside observer of dissociation psychosis, depersonalization, hallucination, and delusion in regard to the subject; the apparent increased muscular strength, and the dissolution and rebuilding of programs and metaprograms by self and by the outside therapist, etc.