individual for interorganism coalitions is based on shape maintenance despite g forces, radiation, heat, etc. The rules within the coalitions at each level are different in that each level is somehow more than the sum of its separated individuals. For coalitions to develop between individual humans, linkages of various sorts are developed agreements are reached and thus the sources of new information from each member are reduced. To maintain a dyadic coalition, interlock between the two human computers is developed. Each human to human interlock is unique; but also each interlock is a function of other current and other past interlocks of each member and of learned traditional models. Coalitions between humans are immense in number and have great complexity in their operations. Each adult individual has linkages extending to literally thousands of other individuals. The amount of time spent on maintenance of linkages is fantastic. The demands on one's self by the various coalitions uses up most of one's awake hours (and possibly most of one's sleeping hours). To clarify the discussion we must carefully distinguish between an interhuman coalition operating here and now versus one whose past occurrences in the external reality are modeled in the human biocomputer. The here and now operations of the model of a past dyadic coalition can operate in the absence of a current instance of interhuman dyadic coalition or in its presence. 86 But the Model Operates Differently in the Two Cases With vigorous current e.r. interlock, the human biocomputer is busy with information exchange at all levels [verbal and nonverbal, digital and analogic, etc., (G. Bateson)] . The model projects expectations and predictions continuously as the interlock develops (as in McCulloch's model of the eye, 1961). The real inputs are compared with computed outputs in all modes. The isolated solitudinous individual does not have a present coalition to work on, in, or with. He projects past coalitions and makes new models by making new coalitions, of the old ones. As such new relationships are established in his computer he settles logical discrepancies between old models and new ones, tends to abolish discontinuities of the logical consequences, his basic belief structures, and, if necessary, he changes the basic beliefs to have fewer discrepancies between the internal models. Coalitions at all levels (from basic particles, atomicmolecular, to cellularorganismic, to humanhuman levels) have a polar, opposite, balancing set of forces, energies, drives, motivations. On the basic particleatomicmolecular coalition level, this set can be called electric charges, with wellknown coalitional rules (opposite attracts, like repels, quantal

energy jumps, tunnelling effect, etc.). On the biological level of cells, the cellcell coalitions have multiferous possibilities (such as meiosis, mitosis, fission, fusion, positive and negative tropisms, ingestion, excretion, etc.). As long as a cell has its own structure, it maintains only structural relations between molecules in itself: it is said (Duvigneau) that each and every atom in a cell is eventually exchanged for another new atom. The coalitions of a cell's atoms are temporary and in the mass last a most probable time characteristic of cell and atom types (lead in bone vs. sodium in brain, for example). At this cellular level electric charges, on the average, establish gradients; the gradients vary with internal reality and external reality states; the atoms move in and move out, more or less 87 rapidly depending on cell parts (nucleus, mitochondria, ribosomes, etc.) and functional locus (intracellular fluids vs. genic structures, etc.). An intraorganismic cell (in the mammals for example) has coalitions with other cells and with the organism. It has orders about its relations with neighbors, its origins, its meiotic or mitotic future (if any), its motility or sessility, its electrical activity, its chemical activity, where it stays or where it travels and on the average where and when it dies. Each cell is brought under the mass orders of all (of the organism) by carefully regulated rules of feedback and interconnections through chemical, physical and cellular means. The highspeed intercellular neuronal activity system penetrates most of the organism. The intercellular fluid flow penetrates everywhere and bridges the gap between the cell and the blood carriers. The blood system links the basic chemistry everywhere with transport (oxygen from outside, molecules from gut, hormones from pituitary, etc.). At the cellular level in the organism the coalitions are essential, the linkages myriad, and the cell is the wellfed and wellcared for slave of the state (the organism) and is killed if he breaks the orders for his type. Feedback is absolutely limiting here. At the organismorganism level, the coalitions depend, somewhat like the cellular level, on food, temperature, gravity, radiation, reproduction, one's own structure, individuals of other species of life, individuals of one's own species, communication intra and interspecies, use of one's own computer (CNS plus), building and use of human artifacts (from tools to skyscrapers to rockets to nonliving computers), and the control and the creation of human relationships (money, credit, politics, science, books, periodicals, television, etc.). A single human organism can have at least the following coalitions to deal with: (a) Parental till their death, and continuance as internal models 88