The apparent strength of these metaprograms can be enhanced in certain cased by LSD25 plus dextroamphetamine, psychic energizers, etc. 3. Storage Metaprograms These metaprograms have two aspects: there is the active storage process in which the inputs from e.r. and from self are connected to storage: there is the active output process in which the self is connected directly to storage. To achieve these connections there are the search metaprograms. The nature of these programs varies depending upon special conditions. It varies in free association states, hypnogogic states, dreaming states, etc. LSD25 and similar agents allow a special state in which the selfmetaprograms can directly consciously explore much of the storage itself. In this particular state the selfmetaprograms and 133 the searchmetaprograms operate coextensively in such a way as to reveal the innermost files of the storage directly to self. 4. Autonomic (Nervous System) Programs The autonomic nervous system has builtin properties which are definitely programmatic rather than metaprogrammatic. The relationships between these and the selfmetaprogram are second order. These autonomic programs do not exist directly in selfmetaprograms. These programs include the programs for the gastrointestinal tract, for sex, for anger, for fright, etc. These programs can be modified by the selfmetaprogram; once started their detailed carryingout is automatic. 5. Body Maintenance Programs These are programs which cut across the lines of the previous ones and include such consciousunconscious programs as the needs and the carrying out of sleep, exercise, correct food, environmental temperature regulations, clothing, etc. The realities of the body maintenance in the external reality are included in these programs. 6. FamilyLoveReproductionChildren Program This is also an aspect of the external reality metaprogram and here is separated out as one of the basic programs within that one. Depending upon the individual computer there can be many more programs; some may be devised as above, others cut across the above boundaries. Such divisions, in the last analysis, are artificial and reflect the tendency of a human to think and act disintegrated into categories rather than as an integrated smoothly operating holistic computer.

7. Survival Metaprograms Survival Priorities are used in case of threat to structural and/ or functional integrity of the entities named the order is that of relative importance in the sense that the one below in the list 134 will be sacrificed, abandoned, penalized, or changed in order to save, maintain, integrate, or educate the one above in the series. A threat is defined as internal (mental) information (which when above threshold) anticipates and predicts immediate or delayed destruction, mutilation, confinement, abandonment, damnation, ostracism, solution (lysis) of continuity, compromised integrity, moral encroachment, severe ethical insult, voluntary seduction, unconscious entrancement, slavery, etc. In nonthreatening educative processes the listing is more flexible any entity may, for a time, be placed at the head of the new list. This survival priorities list may remain intact in this order in the depths below awareness. It is evoked in states of fatigue which begin to generate information above the threat threshold . O. The Soulspirit this concept includes life after mortal death, reincarnation, the immortal entity, that which is Godgiven, none of which is in current Science. This is currently considered by some persons as the most valuable of all the available entities. Depending on the needs of the definer, this entity may be educable, may have higher ethical strivings than current ones, may store information of certain kinds, may develop skills in certain areas, may carry these capabilities within it to the next state after the current mortal physical reality is left, etc. 1. Egomind Entity: one's mind and mental self are valued above the body (and in those with the above religious belief, below the soul). 2. Body it is obvious that one values one's body less than one's mental self; however, at times one can be forced to act as if the list did not have this order but the opposite. Sometimes the mind shuts down, leaving the body to its survival battle alone. 3. Lover starting with the prototypic father and mother models and moving to wife or husband models. 4. Child: one's own child. 5. Siblings. 6. Parents.

7. Valued friends. 8. Humans in general. KEY TO CATEGORIES INFEFERENCES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY B study of certain literature in biology C computers H hypnosis I psychiatry L logic M brain and mind models N neuropsychopharmacology O psychology P psychoanalysis T communication 135 References (See also the Categorized Bibliography, page 145) Category Page U N 3 Bradley, P. B. and J. Elkes. 1953. "The Effect of Amphetamine and DLysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD25) on the Electrical Activity of the Brain of the Conscious Cat." j. Physiol. (London) 120: 13 p.

M* 3 Ashby, W. Ross. 1952. Design forBrain. John Wiley. l M 119 Brady, joseph V. 1960. "Temporal and Emotional 60 New York. 260 p. | Effects Related to Intracranial Electrical Self M 3 . 1962. "What is Mind? Objective and Sub | Stimulation." Chapter 3 in Electrical Studies of tbe jective Aspects in Cybernetics." Chapter in Theories | Unanestbetized Brain. Estelle R. Ramey and Des of the Mind. Jordan M. Scher (ed.). The Free Press l mond S. O'Doherty, Ed. pp. 5277. Of Greece, New York and Macmillan: New York, O 3 Bruner, Jerome S., Jacqueline J. Goodnow and London. pp. 305313. GeorgeA.Austin. 1956.AStudyofTbinking.John O 3 Bartlett, Sir Fredric. 1858. Tbinking. "An Experi Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York; Chapman & Hall, mental and Social Study." Basic Books, Inc., Pub Ltd., London. 330 p. Iishers, New York. 203 p. L xx Carnap, Rudolf. 1942. Introduction to Semantics. I & M 3 Bateson, Gregory, Don D. jackson, Jay Haley, and 3 Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge, Mass. 256 p. 84 JohnWeakland. 1956. "TowardaTheoryofSchizo l L xx . 1943. Formalization of Logic. Harvard phrenia." BehavioralSci.l: 251264. University Press, Cambridge, Mass. 159 p. H 3 Bernheim, H. 1888. Hypnosis and Suggestion in Psy L xx . 1945. "Foundations of Logic and Math 9 cbotherapy. "A Treatise on the Nature and Uses of 3 ematics." Vol. l No. 3 Int'l. Encyclopedia of 75 Hypnotism." Translated from the 2nd revised ed. Unified Science. Vols. I & 11: Foundations of the by C. A. Herter. 1964.University Books, New Hyde | Unity of Science. Univ. of Chicago Press, Chicago, Park, N. Y. 428 p. 111.