102 Programs designed for survival of the body in a gravitational field take up a large fraction of the apparatus and of the time and energy of the human computer. The physiological limits of stimulation of the special senses must be closely maintained, i.e., not too high or too low levels of light, sound, and so forth. External temperatures and internal temperatures must be regulated within certain limits. Illnesses introduce new programs, including those illnesses which are the result of selfmetaprogramming. Direct physical injury with physical trauma to the body have their own imperatives. The intake of certain gases into the respiratory system must be regulated very cautiously. Among these are oxygen, carbon dioxide, water vapor, carbon monoxide, nitrogen, xenon, krypton, nitrous oxide, and so forth. There are programs regulating the amount of liquid surrounding the body (for example, to avoid drowning), the amount of solids piled on top of the body (to avoid crushing), the total pressures of gases around the body (neither too much nor too little), the level of radiation, the level of elementary particles from outer space, or from artificial sources. The various kinds of viruses, bacteria, fungi, algae, protozoa, and so forth, must be carefully regulated by proper programming. Interactions of the human computer with other mammals and with supramammalian species must be programmed in an anticipatory way. There must be regulation of information, the kind of information and the amounts from anywhere and from anyone for the best functioning of the human computer. There are such phenomena as "informationoverload" and "informationdeprivation." There are multiple programs for the regulation of the individual with respect to the society surrounding him, which have their own imperatives. In summary, there are metaprograms which must be assumed 103 to be true in the sense of external reality and external proof. Each of these metaprograms has its own definition of that which is true or false. The 'as if true' and 'as if false' categories can only be applied to these metaprograms in temporary hypothetical consideration of their content but not in their performance in the real computer and in the real world. During the LSD25 state certain of these programs must be considered as true (externally true and provable) in order to survive during the LSD25 state. These matters are examined in more detail in other parts of this work. 13 Hardware, Software Relationships in the

Human Biocomputer * Make the following simplifying assumptions in order to investigate some of the complex relationships between the metaprograms, programs and the neuronal activity in the central nervous system 1. Assume an array of approximately 10^10neurons connected in the particular ways they are in the central nervous system. 2. Assume that the particular critical events in each neuron is the firing of an impulse into its axon. 3. Assume a method of control of this firing from outside the CNS. 4. Assume a method of pickup of the impulse discharged which can be transmitted to the outside of the CNS. 5. Assume that each impulse of each neuron in the 10^10 array is recorded in a highspeed computer outside the CNS. 6. Storage of the time of occurrence of each impulse is stored as a separate datum. *Levels IVXI, Fig. 1. 104 1O5 7. Assume that for every second there are 10^14 such impulses stored from the total CNS. 8. Assume that this external computer can, in a subsequent time period over 10^10 channels, reproduce the time pattern of impulses stored, in the same time pattern in which they came into storage. 9. Test this hypothesis by a behavioral technique. 10. During a time in which the organism containing the biocomputer is doing some complex behavior such as speaking a sentence and writing a sentence at the same time, record completely the external behavior [color 3D motion pictures, multiple channel tape (microphones, etc.)] . 11. Store all of the neuronal signs of activity during the time of production of speech and of the writing.

12. In a subsequent time period, play back or call up from storage the patterns which were stored in the same sequence and put them out from the computer over 10^10 channels into the CNS. 13. Record the subsequent behavior and compare this record with the previous external record of the behavior when the sentence was being produced. 14. The present theory states that behavior of the organism during the time of reproduction of the pattern will be very closely identical with the original occurrence of the behavior. If the original hypothesis is correct, the two patterns of behavior as seen by camera, sound recorders, and so forth, will be identical. If something else is operating in the computer than control by neural impulses, the two behaviors will have differences, depending on the extent of the control. It may be that 106 longer time patterns are needed in order to control all of the feedbacks (with, say, the endocrine and biochemical systems) which have longer time constants than the proposed experiment. There may have to be preconditioning periods which are also stored, before the two behavior sequences can be made identical. With this model, we can ask many basic questions: for example, what is the physical set of events which gives rise to phenomena in the area of the phoneme, in the area of semantic levels of abstraction, in the areas of metaprogramming outside, and the use of language for programming? With this technique, evaluation of drug effects on the central nervous system can have meaningful results in terms of the critical physical events taking place in the CNS. Analyses can be made of the kinds of programming and metaprogramming that take place in separate systems of the brain such as the neocortex, the meso, paleo, and archeocortices versus the subcortical systems such as the thalmus, the hypothalmus, mesencephalon, etc. A systems analysis is then possible of the limbic system, the positively reinforcing and negatively reinforcing systems, the control of the pituitary, and the feedback control by the contents of the blood of the various parts of the CNS. Evaluation of the feedback relationships between all of these systems can then be specified in a quantitative way. This formulation objectifies the subjective in a way in which experiments can be designed, not only to store the objective aspects of subjective events, but also to reproduce the subjective events from store. It permits quantitative analysis of the physical aspects of the subjective events outside of the CNS which originally created them. It also permits of experiments in which a given CNS can control most (if not all) of the functions of a second CNS. The corresponding parts of the second CNS as compared to