of ideas in these areas must be explored honestly and truthfully. The rewarding and positivelyreinforcing effects of LSD2 5 must be remembered and emphasized; one overvalues the results of one's chemically rewarding thinking. Once one has done such deep analysis one later finds deeper that these needs were generating these ideas. One's public need to proclaim them to one's self and to others, as if they are the ultimate truth, is an expression of one's need to believe. Insight into the fact that one is enthused because the positive, startand-maintain, rewarding sign has been chemically stamped on these ideas must be remembered. An explorer operating at these depths cannot afford such childish baggage. These are disguises of and evasions of the ultimate dissolution of self; the maintenance of pleasure and of life are insisting on denial of death. If one stops at these beliefs, no progress in further analysis can be made. These beliefs are analysis dissolvers. One might call these lazy assumptions which prevent one from pushing deeper into self and avoid expending any great effort in this deeper direction. One of these very powerful evasions is an hedonistic acceptance of things as they are with conversion of most of them to a pleasant glow. Another similar evasion is deferring discussion of such basic issues until one's life after death. A possibly great spur to work in this area for certain kinds of persons is the acceptance of unknowables and of the unknown itself. A powerful wish to push into the unknown further than those ahead of one in calendar time is helpful in terms of one's motivation at this point. Everyone has his say about the truth in this area. Many other persons would like very much to have one follow their metaprograms. In my own view I would prefer to be a questing mind reporting on some interesting journeys. Insofar as I fail to be this, 1, too, am guilty of attempting to metaprogram the reader. In summary then one starts on the deeper journeys, inde-40 pendently, metaprogrammed properly, and relatively safe but without evasions. After having been through some of the innermost depths of self7 a result is that they are only one's own beliefs and their multitudes of randomized logical consequences deep down inside one7s self. There is nothing else but stored experience.Summary of Experiments in SelfMetaprogramming with LSD25 In order to test the validity of some of the basic assumptions implicit in the theory of the human computer7 a series of experiments were designed and carried out in the LSD25 state7 in physical isolation7 and solitude. One point of primary interest during these experiments was to find out what level of intensity of belief in a set of assumptions could be achieved. The assumptions tested in this set of experiments are not those of current science: they are not in the conscious working repertory of this scientist; nor were they consciously acceptable to him. In this short account it is not intended to give all of the details of either the selfmetaprogramming language that was used or the details of the elicited phenomena.

The account is purposely sparse7 condensed7 and compressed. Abstracted from the complexity of the totality of the experiments and their results are only those formal descriptions which may serve as guide posts to others attempting to reproduce these or similar experiments. It is not intended to complicate this account with the personal aspects of the metaprogramming7 the elicited phenomena7 or difficulties encountered. For those researchers who are interested in this work7s reproduction in themselves7 these assumptions (or similar ones) and these results can be translated into their own metaprogramming language and such workers can obtain their unique results. 4142 To claim validity of details beyond myself is not my aim. There probably are those men who are prepared well enough to attempt reproducing what has been done here in themselves. The descriptions are given so that the sources of the human computer theory are available to professionals. This particular set of existence theorems is selected for experiment for a number of reasons. There are a number of persons (Blum, 1964) who experimented with the LSD25 state who write as if they believe implicitly in the objective reality of causes outside themselves for certain kinds of experiences undergone with these particular beliefs. I do not think it wise to espouse either the existence or the nonexistence theorem for this set of basic supraselfmetaprograms (Fig. 1). To become impartial, dispassionate, and general purpose, objective, and openended, one must test and adjust the level of credence in each of his sets of beliefs. If ever Man is to be faced with real organisms with greater wisdom7 greater intellect, greater minds than any single man has, then we must be open, unbiased, sensitive, general purpose, and dispassionate. Our needs for phantasies must have been analyzed and seen for what they are and are not or we will be in even graver troubles than we are today. Our search for mentally healthy paths to human progress in the innermost realities depends upon progress in this area. Many men have floundered in this area of belief: I hope this work can help to find a way through one of our stickiest intellectual-emotional regions. Most of these beliefs are ones which have been abandoned in the fields of endeavor called science. Such beliefs continue to be found in the field known as religion. Some of these beliefs are labeled in modern psychiatric medicine and anthropology as superstitions, psychotic beliefs, etc. Other persons present these beliefs in the writings called science fiction. This set of basic postulates (or beliefs) is conceived and used43 to program several sessions with LSD25 plus physical isolation in solitude. Above all these metaprograms to be experimented upon is one metaprogram of value to this subject his overall policy is the intent to explore, to observe, to analyze. Hence there is an