Group acceptance of undemonstrated existence theorems and of seductive beliefs adds no more validity to the theorems and to the beliefs than one's own phantasizing can add. Anaclitic group behavior is no better than solitudinous phantasies of the truth. Where agreedupon truth can exist in the science of the innermost realities is not and cannot yet be settled. Beginnings have been made by many men, satisfying proofs by one. 3.Personal Metaprogrammatic Language: An Example of Its Properties Among all of the languages possessed by one's self some are used to control the metaprogrammatic level in Fig. 1. The self-metaprogrammer exerts control through the personal metaprogrammatic language. This is the language which controls the computer itself, how it operates, and how it computes as an integral whole. Each human computer has a unique private control language in its unique stored programs, stored metaprograms, and stored selfmetaprograms. This language is not all shared in the usual public domain of the language acquired in childhood. In this particular instance one can visualize in Fig. 1 certain levels in and at which the experiments were done in detail. This control language and control of the biocomputer itself can be changed as new understanding of control allows new control. This language has aspects which are nonverbal, nonvocal and can be more emotional and/or mathematical than they are linguistic. Here we are expressing some "linguistic" aspects and some of the '>nathematical" nonverbal experiences. We are limited in this public expression to the consensus nonprivate language. The experiments were designed along the lines of finding solutions to certain personal problems within the biocomputer. These Problems are the basic ones of the Presence of antithetical and 53 54 contradictory metaprograms. In Fig. 1 some of these paradoxical and agonistic problems appear at the supraselfmetaprogram level and some at the metaprogram level. One such experiment was on a spontaneous occurrence of a phrase (during the LSD25 state) which took on elements of humor and the aspect as if a great discovery. The private metaprogrammatic control instruction is the key is no key. In the external reality, stimulus for this statement was a number of keys which the subject had been carrying around for several years. He suddenly became aware that he had in his life many locks. Thus it was necessary for him to carry many keys. At times these keys were felt as a physical and a mental burden which slowed the efficient operation of his life. These were aspects of the phrase key which were real keys, real locks on real doors

to real rooms, real houses, real offices, etc. At that particular moment this seemed to be the epitome of modern civilization: to have doors, to have locks on those doors, and have privileged persons who possessed the keys to open those doors. The subject next moved from the meanings in the external reality metaprogram to another level in which he internalized this picture of the door, the room, the lock, the key. He visualized his own antithetical metaprograms as existing in rooms separated by doors which had locks on them. He was searching for the keys to open the doors. As these inner rooms (categories, problems, antitheses) became embodied in the locked door imaginedprojected metaphor the subject began to walk through metaprogrammatic storage looking for a key to open the next door into the further recesses of the rooms. As he moved he began to see that the doors were defined as doors by his own computer; locks were defined as locks; and that keys were defined as necessary to open the locks. In a moment of insight, he saw that the defined boundaries (the doors, the walls, ceilings, the floors, and the locks themselves and their keys) were a convenient metaprogram dividing up his 55 knowledge and his control mechanisms into compartments in an artificial personal fashion. He explored many rooms with many different kinds of knowledge in the rooms. The walls slowly began to dissolve, some of them melted and flowed away; other rooms were revealed as solid and the doors with secure locks rather numerous; some keys were missing. Most of the hypothesized building inside his own mind, however, now became open spaces with information freely available without the former walls between arbitrary rooms of categories. Those rooms, locks, and keys that were left were quite basic to the development of this individual's selfmetaprogram. Some of these rooms were created in childhood in response to situations over which the selfmetaprogrammer had no control. These rooms housed ideas and systems of thinking which to this particular subject evoked intense fear or intense anger as he approached with the intent of opening the doors. The locks did not respond to frontal assaults. These rooms turned out to be very difficult to define out of existence in order to have their contents interact with the rest of the metaprogrammatic level. The subject underwent a frantic and frightened search for the keys to the locks of these strongrooms. He became alternately fearful and angry. He made several assaults on walls, doors, ceilings and floors of these closed rooms without much success.