In the profound physical isolation situation one acquires, or one has, or one develops a confidence in one's body to function quite automatically and to take care of itself. The whole problem of air supply, keeping one's face above the water, the action of respiration and of heart, etc., are all turned over to the protohuman survival programs to maintain themselves. All tendencies on the part of a subject to control or to monitor his own respira-36 tion or his own heart action should be discouraged. The same applies to the gastrointestinal tract and the genitourinary tract. Insofar as can be achieved automatic operations of these systems should be encouraged. Gradually they will assume their proper lowlevel expression in the psychic life of the individual subject. Confidence in their continued operation without attention by one's self (by the selfmetaprograms) can be achieved. These considerations are particularly important with the LSD25 as the physical isolation and solitude begin to develop. On the analytic side one must have analyzed and dealt with one's unconscious death wishes. Up to a certain critical point one knows and feels the probability of survival under conditions over which one has control. One has already experienced internal mechanisms which may have tried to take over and deal a death-seeking blow to one. This kind of material must have been thoroughly analyzed with an external analyst before one approaches experiments such as these. One's self and one's analyst must be content that the level of control of such internal mechanisms is such that the probability of their dealing a deathseeking blow is low enough to risk exposure to these new conditions. This point cannot be emphasized strongly enough. Those who are acquainted with the phenomena during classical psychoanalysis realize that certain kinds of personalities and certain individuals during analysis and after analysis can go through depressive phases in which such death wishes can be acted out. The seeds of destruction of self can be buried in the deeper metaprograms and programs of one's own computer. Certain kinds of neuronal activities can destroy an organism. These are the kinds of activities which one must know and be aware of the signs and the symbols of evocation of these systems within one's self. Such negative phenomena are usually seen after the first session or two with LSD25. The residual unanalyzed portion of these programs are usually projected and acted out as a consequence of their release by this agent. Several analytic sessions37 with an external analyst are thus necessary for maximum safety and minimum risk in these experiments. In the farthest and deepest state of isolation, one's basic needs and one's assumptions about self become evident. The existence of self and one's belief in the existence of one's self are made manifest. The positive or negative sign of values that one places upon one's self and upon the existence of one's self begins to show its force and strength. The problems discussed, but generally unfaced in a religious context in the external real world, are faced and can be lived out with a freedom unavailable since childhood.

The problem of the dissolution of one's conscious self by death of the body is studiable. One's evasions of this problem and of facing it can be projected into studiable areas of one's experience. The existence theorem for spiritual and psychic entities is also testable and the strength of one's belief in these entities can be analyzed. Evasions of selfanalysis and evasions of taking on certain kinds of beliefs can be tested. In this area the denial and negation mechanisms of classical psychoanalysis show their strength. Previous analysis can train one to recognize that when data cannot be called up or when displays cannot be constructed or when certain operations cannot be carried out, one can see the cause currently existing. The set of inhibitory and repressive devices in one's computer is hard at work. In such inhibitory and repressive states preprogrammed sets of basic assumptions to be explored are incompletely carried out. One quickly finds areas of the consequences of the assumed beliefs, which one cannot enter or only enters with fear, with anger, or with love, carried over from some other programming.38 DEFINITION OF A GENERAL PURPOSE SELF-METAPROGRAM The essential features and the goals sought in the selfanalysis are in the metaprogram: make the computer general purpose. In this sense we mean that in the general purpose nature of the computer there can be no display, no acting, nor an ideal which is forbidden to a consciouslywilled metaprogram. Nor is any display, acting or ideal made without being consciously metaprogrammed. In each case of course one is up against the limits of the unique computer which is one's own. There are certain kinds of metaprograms, displays, acting, or ideals which are beyond the capacity of a particular computer. However, one's imagined limits are sometimes smaller than those which one can achieve with special work. The metaprogram of the specific beliefs about the limits of one's self are at stake here. One's ability to achieve certain special states of consciousness, for example, are generally preprogrammed by basic beliefs taken on in childhood. If the computer is to maintain its general purpose nature (which presumably was there in childhood), one must recapture a far greater range of phenomena than one expects that one has available. For instance, one should be able to program in practically any area possible within human imagination, human action or human being. As explorations deepen, one can see the evading nature of many programs which one previously considered basic to one's private and professional philosophy. As one opens up the depths, it is wise not to privately or publicly espouse as ultimate any truths one finds in the following areas: the universe in general, beings not human, thought transference, life after death, transmigration of souls, racial memories, speciesjumpingthinking, nonphysical action at a distance, and so forth. Such ideas may merely be a reflection of one's needs in terms of one's own survival. Ruthless selfanalysis as to one's needs for certain kinds39