These distortions of the field are not static. The effects (maximal to the right) are seen as timevarying functions. Not only is there an apparent geometrical factor fixed to the body coordinates but there is a varying set of factors. It is the latter set that are locked in by an unconscious program for perception and for feelings. For the evocation of these programs in the LSD25 state the beliefs for the day metaprogram determines the outcome. The patient says to himself the presences seen come from outside me and my program storage. These metaprogrammatic orders then are used in his computer to construct and modify whatever apparently comes in to create presences and at the same time to place the presences outside the computer itself. Thus these orders are essentially used twice: (1) For constructing a basic belief about the external reality of the presences and (2) for a display which demonstrates the results of computations using that belief. The belief is used on incoming signals with uncertain or distorted origins. Without LSD25 this patient finds it difficult if not impossible to program such projections. He cannot use this basic belief counter to the powerful external reality program. It may be possible for him to use this belief without the LSD25 state in possibly other extreme conditions, such as in the presence of white noise of large magnitude, the hypnogogic state, the dreaming state in sleep, or during hypnotic trance. This patient says, "With the usual high levels of daylight in the summers or artificial light in the house, with the stimulation of me by other persons, with the usual high sound levels of e.r., all organized in demanding ways to call upon my purposes (integral to me), I cannot (or will not) program 'alien presences in the e.r.' Nor will I any longer so program 'presences' into other persons, as a consequence of my detection of the fact that I 'unconsciously programmed' presences of my own creation into other persons." In most cases the unconscious programming is used to project 66 one's own beliefs and "presences" into and onto other persons in the e.r. This is the easiest route to use and the hardest to detect. The detection is difficult because of (1) the resemblance of one human to another, (2) the apparently meaningless "noisy" signals other persons emit in every mode, and (3) the interlocking feedback relations between one's self and the important persons in the e.r. or the apparent but effective e.r. created by telephone, radio, television, motion pictures, books, etc. Patients can thus have even evocable proof (false) of the reality (false) of their beliefs about another person. It is almost as if one can extend one's own braincomputer into that of another person by feedback and thus use the other as an actor, acting ("out there") the part assigned by one's own beliefs. Naturally, the performance is not perfect (see later Interlock). If the roles are accepted by the other and acted upon as new programming, unconsciously, one cannot see these processes easily. If the other person asserts himself and opposes the assigned roles, one has an opportunity to examine these processes in one's self.

One can make the following selfassumptions about the above sources of information, in solitude, in the LSD25 state (1) inside one's own head; (2) from other beings, nonhuman; (3) from outer space intelligences; (4) from ESP with humans. If one assumes a transcendence program, one's computer generates it according to one's own rules for transcendence. Programming can be assumed as if it came from self, or other humans, and/or from other beings. Modern scientists assume that under these conditions information comes only from self, i.e., from storage wholly within the human computer. 5 Note on the Potentially Lethal Aspects of Certain Unconscious, Protohuman, Survival Programs It was found empirically that certain aspects of some programs carry the ability to destroy the individual biocomputer, or at least the ability to lead the way into potentially destructive action. A metaprogram to neutralize programs with selfdestruction in them is necessary. The use of LSD25 in selfanalysis allows quick penetration to such buried lethality; a definite caution is advised in such use of this technique. Until such unconscious programs are found and thoroughly investigated, and understood in terms of the metaprogrammatic future, personal professional supervision (of a special type) is recommended. Such supervision should be over the whole period of investigation and (in detail) should be before, during, and after a session for at least several days. Some of the instinctual patterns of behavior stirred up in the process of the session apparently must be actedout in order to be tested, understood and filed properly in the metaprograms for the future plans of the individual. In this phase, dangers to self arise. The states of the revelation of the implanted deeper programs may involve the stages of childhood plus those presumed to have led Man (as an evolving primate) to civilization itself, and finally those leading into Man's own future beyond present accomplishments. Near the beginning (and sometimes later) of the LSD25 67 68 analyses some survival programs (protohuman) may appear. These programs include expressions of strong sexuality, gluttony, panic, anger, overwhelming guilt, sadomasochistic actions and phantasies, and superstitions. These are of amazing strength and power over the selfmetaprogram. Much of this material is wordless: existing in the emotionfeelingmotivational storage parts of the computer, it usually has only poor representations in the modeling, clear thinking and verbal portions. The LSD25 allows