Fixed Neurological Program (Migraine): Example of Perception and Belief Interactions Specific example is given some experiments were done on reprogramming a specific biocomputer (migraine case) in the LSD25 state . Under certain special circumstances it has been found possible to program certain trends in perception and project them into the visual space for study. Among such processes are the apparent presence of other persons. One's belief in the reality of these presences is not at stake here. Unless one purposely intensifies the belief in the reality of these presences, one can detect that they are not existing in the external reality. The safe metaprogram to use is that they exist only in the mind even though they appear to exist outside the body. One may ask the question do these programs exist continuously below the threshold of consciousness in the usual mental state, or are they created de novo in or by the LSD25 state? Current psychoanalytic and psychiatric theories state that they exist in the "unconscious" below the levels of awareness and are evoked from that region of the computer by the LSD25 state. All we can say here is that this looks like the more likely of the two alternatives; however, the other one should be kept in mind. Some of these belowthresholdprograms once detected with the LSD25 state can (in solitude without LSD25) be just detected 62 63 near threshold in a highly motivated state. Without LSD25 one can achieve the necessary excitation of these programs to force them above threshold. In one particular subject migraine was used as an advantageous tracer and a spur to the selfanalysis. In this case there were asymmetries of the spatial perception fields. The right side of the visual field was very different from the left side. (What was seen from the right eye was different from that seen with the left eye.) These differences reside in color, in the persistence of afterimages, in the occurrences of scotoma during a migraine attack, etc. (As is well known in the clinical literature such conditions can exist easily forty years or more.) Among these asymmetries there are spatial distortions of the visual system. In this particular case the right eye is more sensitive, has a lower threshold for photophobia and pain in general. The sensations and skin perceptions on the right side of the head are less pleasant and stronger than those on the left. The migraine attack is confined to the right side of the head.

At times correct programming can be achieved in the LSD25 state so that these cephalic differences can be enhanced, studied, and projected. Recall and living out of past experiences from childhood show a traumatic use of the right side of the head. In the LSD25 state abrupt physical blows to the right side of the head with violent shrinking away from the source, with right eye closure falling away to the left, and brief apparent "loss of consciousness" was experienced. This is an example of a long-term (apparently) builtin unconscious program. This experience was not elicited without the help of the LSD25 state nor without the help of abreactions in classical psychoanalysis. All that can be seen of this program during the usual daily e.r. state is the asymmetry of perception. In the LSD25 state this autonomous program generated some presences not real but perceived as if real. When with proper metaprogramming this effect was raised above threshold, the 64 presences were felt and seen as shadowy creatures or persons coming in from the right side of the visual field out of darkness. The impression is that the spatial field of perception becomes distorted in such a way that the presences can penetrate the distorted field. In thinking about this effect the patient generated a theory of the projections as if it was no projection. The patient states that these are beings from another dimension penetrating through a hole between their and our universes. (This attribution of causes makes no sense unless it is believed implicitly.) Once the intensity of belief in this system is lowered, the critical threshold for the distortion of the perceptual field becomes obvious and the unconsciously programmed projection process becomes detectable. The artificial beings now are no longer that, they are merely distortions of the visual field because of some peculiar development of the nervous system. The dramatic bringing in of external beings was shown to have a need of its own, a relief from the solitude and isolation. Essential loneliness gives rise to the creation of those beings within this particular person. The necessity of projecting his own anger and fears by the creation of these beings was found in the subsequent analysis. After these experiences study of these phenomena without LSD25 in solitude and isolation showed that the distorted field can be detected by relaxation of vigilance and by free association into the edges of the perceptual spaces using any random sequence of stimuli for the projection energy. Without the LSD25 the beings or presences do not appear. Peculiar distortions of the perceptual space do appear. These distortions gave the excuse for the projection of the beings. The subject created alien presences out of perceptually distorted noises by means of a belief program. The complex patterns of the noise coming through the spatially distorted and modified fields of the perceptual apparatus allowed creative construction of figures which satisfied current needs. 65