The increase in white noise energy allows quick and random access to memory and lowers the threshold to unconscious memories (expansion of consciousness). In such noise one can 76 77 project almost anything at almost any cognitive level in almost any allowable mode: one dramatic example is the conviction of some subjects of hearingseeingfeeling God, when "way out." One projects one's expectations of God onto the white noise as if the noise were signals; one bears the voice of God in the Noise. With a bit of proper programming under the right conditions, with the right dose, at the right time, one can program almost anything into the noise within one's cognitive limits; the limits are only one's own conceptual limits, including limits set by one's repressed, inhibited, and forbidden areas of thought. The latter can be analyzed and freed up using the energy of the white noise in the service of the ego, i.e., a metaprogram analyze yourself can be part of the instructions to be carried out in the LSD25 state. The noise introduced brings a certain amount of disorder with it, even as white noise in the physical world brings randomness. However, the LSD25 noise randomizes signals only in a limited way: not enough to destroy all order, only enough to superimpose a small creative "jiggling" on program materials and metaprograms and their signals. This noisy component added to the usual signals in the circuits adds enough uncertainty to the meanings to make new interpretations more probable. If the noise becomes too intense, one might expect it to wipe out information and lead to unconsciousness (at very high levels, death). The major operative principle seems to be that the human computer operates in such a way as to make signals out of noise and thus to create information out of random energies where there was no signal; this is the "projection principle"; noise is creatively used in nonnoise models. The information "created" from the noise can be shown by careful analysis to have been in the storage system of the computer, i.e., the operation of projection moves information out of storage into the perception apparatus so that it appears to originate in the chosen "outside" noisily excited system. 78 Demonstrations of this principle are multiferous: in a single mode, listening to a real acoustic physical white noise in profound isolation in solitude one can hear what one wants (or fears) to hear, human voices talking about one, or one's enemies discussing plans, etc. With LSD25 one can use two modes: one can listen to white noise (including very low frequencies) and see desired (or feared3 visions projected on the blank screen of one's closed eyes. One can, in profound isolation (water suspension, silence, darkness, isothermal skin, etc., in solitude) detect the noise level of the mind itself and use it for cognitional projections rather than senseorgandata projections. Instead of seeing or

hearing the projected data, one feels and thinks it. This is one basis of the mistake by certain persons of assuming that the projected thoughts come from outside one's own mind, i.e., oneness with the universe, the thoughts of God in one, extraterrestrial beings sending thoughts into one, etc. Because of the lack of sensory stimuli, and lack of normal inputs into the computer (lack of energy in the reality program), the space in the computer usually used for the projection of data from the senses (and hence the external world) is available substitutively for the display of thinking and feeling. As was stated by Von Foerster ("BioLogic," 1962): "The occurrence of such spontaneous errors is far from an uncommon event. Conservative estimates suggest about 1014 elementary operations per second in a single human brain. If we can believe the recent work of Hyden (1960) and Pauling (1961), these operations are performed on about 102 1 molecules. From stability considerations (Von Foerster, 1948) we may estimate that per second from 109 to 1011 molecules will spontaneously change their quantum state as a result of the tunnel effect. This suggests that from 103 to 101% of all operations in the brain are afflicted with an intrinsic noise 79 figure which has to be taken care of in one way OF another." And further (same reference): . . ."The beginning of our century saw the fallacy of our progenitors in their trust in a fixed number of m propositions. This number constantly grows with new discoveries which add new variables to our system of knowledge. In this connection it may amuse you that in order just to keep the logical strength of our wisdom from slipping, the ratio of the rate of coalescing, k, to the rate of discovery, m, must okay the inequality (k/m) >= k * ln 2 I have the feeling that today, with our tremendous increase in experimental techniques, m is occasionally so large that the above inequality is not fulfilled, and we are left with more riddles than before. "To this frustration to reach perfect truth we, children of the second half of the twentieth century, have added another doubt. This is the suspicion that noise may enter the most effective coalition, flipping an established 'false' into a deceptive 'true,' or, what might be even worse, flipping an irrelevant 'true' into an unwarranted 'false."' GROWTH HYPOTHESIS 1. One major biological effect of LSD25 may be a selective effect on growth patterns in the CNS. Some parts of the CNS are thought to be specifically accelerated in their 80