5 Jung speculated that our connection to nature is ancient and undeniable. At the most profound levels of the unconscious, everything becomes less and less differentiated until our ego no longer exists as a separate entity: The deeper layers of the psyche lose their individual uniqueness as they retreat farther and farther into the darkness. Here they become increasingly collective until they are universalized, merging with the body’s instinctual and biological functions and eventually with nature itself. Hence, ‘at bottom’ the psyche is simply ‘world.’ (Jung, in Ryan, 2002, p. 26) Jung went on: Since psyche and matter are contained in one and the same world, and moreover are in continuous contact with one another and ultimately rest on the irrepresentable transcendental factors …psyche and matter are two different aspects of one and the same thing. (Jung, 1970, p. 5) Clearly, Jung discerned that there is no separation. Whatever the external landscape, the internal psychic landscape mirrors it, inhabits it, gives birth to it but also dies into it. The degree to which we are able to perceive the sacredness of what is manifesting around us in nature is the degree to which we are able to believe in the divine aspect of we commonly know as our own human nature. The Sacred Manifests in the Imaginal Both Jungian psychology and shamanism engage with image and call on the imaginal realm for healing. The language of the unconscious is the language of the soul: image as living symbol. Jung stated that psyche is image and for Hillman (1982), as well as for the Greeks, soul is image, too. Ryan (2002) describes how the soul speaks for itself in images and how those images allow us to enter different dimensions of consciousness than the one we are used to in our profane, everyday lives. According to him, images reach into the deepest recesses of the psyche. Cavalli (2002) asserts, “Healing is as much an imaginative process as it is one that relies

6 on material manipulation of the body. Imagination, Einstein said, is as important as knowledge in understanding the universe” (p. 99). In fact, professor of psychology, Jean Achterberg (2002) asserts images literally interact with bodily tissues and conduct a dialogue with cells, organs, tissues, and ultimately with the central nervous system in order to effect change. Imagery has always been central to the work of indigenous shamans. Ryan (2002) asserts, “the shaman everywhere is the great master of ‘thinking in primordial images’” (p. 41). Jung deemed the shaman as having a “direct line to the unconscious” (p. 41). A shaman requires access to images in order to see intrusive spirits that cause disease and to locate the disease in the body. Simply showing a patient an intrusive object that the shaman has extracted can have a powerful effect on the patient, just as patients in the western world are affected by images of an x-ray or a pill that might help them heal. “The shaman today, like his ancestors, is able to ‘see’ an invasion of foreign energy encased in his patient’s body, ‘hear’ the call of a lost soul, and ‘feel’ the brush of his power animal against his leg” (Gagan, 1998, p. 53). Smith (2007) describes the shaman’s effectiveness as a result of being able to enter a different reality, gain a new perspective, and return with it to change the patient’s world image or inherent belief system. Image is the direct path to the unconscious in the opinion of James Hillman (1982). To be imaginative does not necessarily require what we traditionally think of as images, that is, actually seeing imagery; rather, we perceive images with the imagination: we imagine them. Hillman insists images are actually metaphors; thus poetry and music, as well as dream figures and felt experiences, also qualify as image because we perceive them with the inner senses of our psyche. Depth psychology has adopted the term imaginal, coined by twentieth-century French philosopher Henry Corbin, to describe images through which the unknown expresses itself. Jung suggested we look within the psyche, the collective unconscious, to find the sacred, believing it

7 shows up through access to the imaginal realm, the space of myth, dream, and symbol, of ancestors and spirits. Jung found these energetically suffused images to be numinous, instigating emotional resonance in relation to the psyche and self. He theorizes that archetypes, those autonomous, energetic blueprints that are common to all human beings, often show up as numinous images imbued with sacred power. Jung recommended the practice of active imagination, which enables us to engage with unconscious, archetypal, imaginal elements in a creative way (Hopcke, 1999). In Jungian therapy, the analyst guides the patient to connect with images brought forth from the unconscious as dreams or symbols and then encourages him to hold the tension they bring until something begins to shift. Jung attributed the new perspective or worldview that emerges from the opposition as archetypal: a pattern that transcends a particular culture. These newly generated images or configurations interact with the patient at a deep level and allow him or her to begin to shift into a new configuration or context, and therefore to transform. By accessing images and experiences in a dimension where magic and power reside, in which archetypes and entities have dreams, will, and intelligence of their own, we can develop our own relationship with the sacred. Encounter with the imaginal generates rapture, awe, and power; providing insight and growth when we personally interact with it through active imagination, movement, writing, art, poetry or other depth methods (Smith, 2007). Both for Jung, in his world of the unconscious psyche, and for the shaman in nonordinary reality, there is a cosmos equal to the physical world with its own landscape, made of images with energy and will of their own (Ryan, 2002). Our dialogue with and relationship to these living images is the source of soul. Here, Jung claimed, in the depths of the soul’s interior, our mental functioning, connects to the pleroma, the deepest roots of our being, the origin or

8 source. This is the realm the shaman also penetrates in his quests for healing and understanding. It is at the level of the pleroma where the shaman is endowed with the powers to cure and revitalize. This is also the transpersonal space Jung called the subtle body where the “symbol can operate to transform both body and mind” (Ryan, 2002, p. 41). Mazatec shaman, Maria Sabina asserts: There is a world beyond ours, a world that is far away, nearby and invisible. And there it is where God lies, where the dead live, the spirits and the saints, a world where everything has already happened and everything is known. That world talks. It has a language of its own. I report what it says. (Halifax, in Sandner & Wong, 1997, p. 11)

Soul Loss Studies in anthropology led Jung to adopt into psychology a concept prevalent in shamanic societies: that of soul loss. Typically recognized as a state of general malaise, soul loss provides another common thread between both Jungian psychology and shamanism. Soul loss is a fragmentary sequence in which parts of the whole wander away, flee, or get split off, lost, or disoriented resulting in a loss of vitality or life force (Ingerman, 1991). In a shamanic worldview, the dislocated parts are carried away to the underworld; in psychology, they are said to recede into the unconscious. With the critical absence of vital parts of our soul, we are left feeling weak, empty, depressed, deflated, or anxious, and commonly trend toward mental or physical illness. Jung cited the loss of connection between our ego and the Self as the fundamental cause of soul loss: There are two reasons why man loses contact with the regulating center of his soul. One of them is that some single instinctive drive or emotional image can carry him into a onesidedness that makes him lose his balance…his one-sidedness and consequent loss of balance are much dreaded by primitives, who call it “loss of soul.” (1964, pp. 228-9) Hillman (1975) outlines five functions of soul: (1) it makes all meaning possible, (2) it turns events into experiences, (3) it involves a deepening of experience, (4) is communicated in