1 The Shamanic Perspective: Where Jungian Thought and Archetypal Shamanism Converge By Bonnie Bright (bonniebright@depthinsights.com) May 2009 Much has been written about the juncture where Jungian psychology and shamanism converge (Haule, 2009). Indeed, Jung, who developed the concept of archetype, might agree that both are instances of the same primordial image or instinctual pattern known the world over. Both shamanism and Jungian psychology acknowledge the importance of the sacred in healing processes. Both recognize how the sacred is manifest in wild nature and through the realm of the imaginal, areas where modern man has fallen out of consistent connection with wholeness. Both observe how loss of contact with the sacred results in loss of soul and understand that recovery requires initiation and successful integration of direct experience. And both, it would seem, would concern themselves with an alarming manifestation of nature like the massive disappearance of the honeybees. In this work, I will review the commonalities of Jungian psychology and shamanism with a focus on soul and soul loss. The Sacred First, both Jungian psychology and shamanism focus on wholeness as a state of health. Shamanism defines health as being in balance with the sacred, and lack of health as violation of the will of the sacred. Smith (2007) establishes that Jungian thought identifies health as wholeness, and pathology or lack of health as lack of wholeness. He characterizes the sacred as an experience of something that evokes rapture, awe, exaltation, or ecstasy; something that is even dreadful in its intensity and power. As opposed to profane or ordinary, sacred is often perceived in contemporary culture as something alien or other. Though indigenous and earth-based cultures likely made no distinction between the

2 sacred and the profane, in my life, at least, I am increasingly aware that the sacred is not something I experience in my busy everyday routine unless I somehow slow myself to witness a sunset or feel into a sudden sense of longing or love. Only then, in the spaciousness of attention, am I aware I have generally tuned out the sense of something powerful and unknown. Something sacred often invokes a feeling of mystery beyond the power of words to describe. As I touched on earlier, Jung often used the term numinous to connote the sacred: describing it as something which provides an experience or alteration of consciousness independent of human will, arousing, affecting, bedazzling, or blinding one to other realities. Both “sacred” and “numinous” are words connected to the idea of soul, the creative, sacred life force that imbues all things with energy and meaning. James Hillman (1982) describes soul as not just an element, region, or dimension but rather, as a perspective: as deepening, noticing, penetrating, and insight. He seeks to extend the soul beyond humanity to the world at large, to forms and objects around us, whether natural or man-made. Each thing, Hillman claims, has a spark of soul at its core. He challenges us to imagine a world soul, the anima mundi, as that particular soul spark that “offers itself through each thing in its visible form" (p. 77). Jung considered psychology deeply tied to soul; so much that he referred to psychologists as doctors of the soul (D. Bona, personal communication, October 8, 2008). Similarly, Smith (2007) states that the province of the shaman, as technicians of the sacred, is disorders of the soul. Eliade (1974) calls shamans masters of ecstasy, stating, “The shaman is the great specialist in the human soul; he alone ‘sees’ it, for he knows its ‘form’ and its destiny” (p. 8). Smith (2007), noting the pathological conditions emerging in contemporary culture, posits that shamans would diagnose western societies not as having a breach in relations with the

3 sacred, but as having no relations at all with the sacred. As individuals in modern culture, Smith continues, we have repressed the contents of the unconscious and summarily forgotten it entirely, disregarding the magic and mystery there. Shamans and those commonly called folk healers rely on the power that issues from the sacred to conduct their healing activities, and the sheer lack of it in current times and culture epitomizes the tremendous precipice on which we perch as a result. Jung, sensing the enormity of the split between our conscious everyday lifestyle and the vast depth of the psyche, warns, “We do not understand yet that the discovery of the unconscious means an enormous spiritual task, which must be accomplished if we wish to preserve our civilization” (as cited in Sabini, 2005, p. 145). According to Jung, the only way to address the deep loss of connection to soul that we are experiencing as a species is to reestablish our connection to the sacred. Eliade (1974) reports the practice of shamanism has been around for millennia, essentially as long as humans have existed, and is the oldest spiritual healing tradition still in use today. Though the word shaman emerged from Siberia via the Russian language, shamanism is historically found in virtually every culture in the world. Eliade emphasizes shamans cure like doctors and perform miracles like magicians. They manipulate the sacred, and, in fact, "have access to a region of sacred not accessible to other members of the community” (p. 7). Shamans are often linked to events surrounding life and death, healing and health, and spirits and the underworld. Not only are they responsible for the religious direction of a community, they also guard its soul. The Sacred Manifests in Nature The concept of the sacred is inexorably tied to an animistic belief system: the impression that the world and everything in it is imbued with life, intelligence, and spirit. Thus, in the

4 physical or material world, the sacred manifests through wild nature as an infinite source of life and creativity waxing and waning in eternal cycles of death and rebirth. Shamans read nature, regarding and interpreting the elements and events that communicate through soul at all times and places (Eliade, 1974). Jung mourned the loss of the shamanic perspective; of contact between modern man and nature, and he identified our increasing analytic thinking and desire for progress through manipulation of the natural world as devastating to our well-being (Sabini, 2005). Historically, in nature-based cultures, everything could be explained by the maintenance of right relations to the sacred, the divine force that holds the world together. When something went wrong in a family, a village, or a culture, it was obvious that something was radically out of balance with the world: the gods had been offended and equilibrium had to be restored (Smith, 2007). As Jung suggested, as modern man has increasingly developed causal thinking and has pursued science and technology as our foremost religion, we have placed ourselves at the top of a hierarchy that relegates nature, wilderness, and the imaginal to lesser status and importance. Nature has become something we exploit and control, and the imaginal realm, something to analyze, define, or explain away as irrelevant fantasy. No longer do we turn to these dimensions to gain insight and understanding from the gods or the ancestors who came before, or to engage with them to re-establish balance. In fact, it never even occurs to us to try. Jung, grasping our plight, lamented: There are no longer any gods whom we can invoke to help us. The great religions of the world suffer from increasing anemia, because the helpful numina have fled from the woods, rivers, and mountains, and from animals, and the god-men have disappeared underground into the unconscious. There we fool ourselves that they lead an ignominious existence among the relics of our past. Our present lives are dominated by the goddess Reason, who is our greatest and most tragic illusion. By the aid of reason, we assure ourselves, we have “conquered nature.” (1964, p. 91)