The form   of this document is reminiscent of the actual
course of the session, in that I asked him to imperson-
ate the diflEerent mdividuals in his family and express
the feelings of each in face of the situation. When all
that has been quoted was clear to him he became con-
cerned with the vague recollection of a later event
The process of gradual reminiscing was similar to the
                 —
previous one ^the room where his mother lay in bed,
his future stQ>mother talking to the nurse, something
about the dosage of a medicme, his wish that his
mother would         die,   and   his guilt thereafter.   By   the
tune the   effects of thedrug had worn off, he definitely
felt that he had killed his mother by giving her a
                                                   greater
number of drops flian those prescribed, but at the
same tune he doubted the reality of the whole episode
that he was "remembering," ^rfuch           m
                                         turn was rather
vague.
   During the followmg two days, the patient could do
very little else but ponder on the events discovered
under the mfluence of the drug. He alternately accepted
them as true or distrusted their reality, deeming them
illusions caused by MDA. On the other hand, he
                                                    felt

that the process that had begun   with  the session was
not complete and insisted (unsuccessfully) on remem-
                                                     his
bering more of the circumstances assodated with
              MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis          45
mother's death. As time went by, the feeling of reality
of the sexual episode increased, and this paralleled the
disappearance of his doubts with regard to his mas-
culinity. His security (self-assurance) also increased
greatly in his contact with people in general, and he
felt that he could be more spontaneous, though now
he was burdened by an unconscious feeling of guilt.
He did not care much whether he was a homosexual
or not and for the first time in his Ufe could discuss
the matter openly with others. His real guilt now lay
in feeling that he was a murderer and tihat he could
not confess. A   dream that he had some days after the
session impressed him very much. In an episode of this
he was at his mother's funeral, and tigers came in
through the window. He felt that these were expressions
of his own anger, an anger that he had buried early in
his life, and only now was beginning to sense through
a curtain of symbols and memories.
   The change that took place in this patient's under-
standing of his life and feelings may be noted by com-
paring the first paragraph of an autobiography written
before the treatment with the beginning of another
version of it written about a week after the session.
Before the session he begins as follows:
    "I was bom on the 1st of August of 1930 in the
home of a businessman who was very respected in our
circle and belonged to one of the oldest families in
town."
    This is an attitude reminiscent of that which the
previous patient displayed in speaking of the dining
room at home. There die subject initially ignored his
real feelings for this place, which had been the major
torture room of his Hfe, and had replaced them with
pride in his parent's social standing, conveyed by the
polished table and fine cups. In this opening, too, the
patient highlights his parents' "respectability" and, in
so doing, looks at them in terms of the values which
were most important to them. Into these values they
have also molded him to a very high degree, as he,
too, has had to "abdicate from himself," and when a
child abdicates from his real feelings and thoughts he
is left at the mercy of external influences, For this
46                  The Healing Journey
particular boy, "being himself" meant such frustration
and anger at his mother and older brother that he could
not possibly cope, especially in the absence of a strong
father to take sides with him. His father did show some
understanding for his son, and so we can understand
the boy's great attachment to him, but he was weak
and submissive. After the session, the patient no longer
speaks of him as a respectable man who took great
care of him and was expressive of his affectionate feel-
ings, but says, "I see him as a very weak man whom
I                             —
  have always dominated ^whom I have even scolded
on many occasions. He does not know what he wants
and is very cowardly. That is, he has all the defects
that I see in myself. I have never been able to speak
openly with him because he is very gossipy and would
not hesitate to tell others of my affairs. He never sup-
ported me in anything."
    This view of his father is without doubt closer to
his real feelings, and the shift in point of view is prob-
ably related to the fading away of his perception of
hirnself as homosexual. It may be expected that, as he
grows more open to his real feelings, he will experience
less need to be supported by father or father-figures in
the mascuhne world. He is one step closer to tiiis, but
a sense of guilt sttQ prevents him from reconciling the
unknown state of his childhood with his present view
of his mother. It is enlightening to trace the feelings
toward the woman in his family throughout the time
of his treatment. All that he says of his mother in his
first autobiographic report is in a paragraph that has
been already quoted: "As to my mother, though I be-
lieve that she loved me, she never expressed this affec-
tion, in contrast to     my   father,   who was much more
expressive than she was." His frustration here is al-
most unexpressed, not only in that he does not speak
of his own reaction, but in that he does not blame his
mother. Instead, he constructs the view that a character
trait of hers —
              not being expressive        —
                                      caused her not to
show her    affection.
     Elsewhere in his account, he       tells   of his reaction to
his mother's death:      "When    I   was nine years     old,   my
mother died from a long-standing heart              disease. I re-
               MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis            47
member, or I believe recalling, that I did not cry and
that I did not want to leave the house of a cousin where
I had been sent to keep me away from the funeral
rites, and where I was having a good time."
   Of his stepmother, he openly says, "I hated her.
This   woman never loved me and she separated us from
one  another   —
               except me from my older sister, who
always  showed  me great love and whom I love very
much."
  During the session     it became apparent to what de-