We   have seen two domains of energy as part of the
world of ibogaine: one of light and playfulness, the
other of darkness and greed; a world of the sun, of
spirits and dancing, and another of dark ponds, de-
vouring dragons, castrating dogs, threatening gorillas.
Somewhere in between are images such as that of a
golden lion or a dancing Negro. How do the tube
and the sun relate to the "lower'' domain of ibogaine
experiences, that of animality, rage, and lonely sep-
arateness? I think that the consideration of one further
case will serve to organize and understand better some
of the clues which have been provided by the material
presented thus far.
   In brief, it may be said that, for the first four hours,
the thoughts and fantasies of this patient (a thirty-
eight-year-old politician) were predominantly sexual
and aggressive. During this time, two images kept
reappearing with some variations: one, the tube (which
was at first a ring, or an eye), and the other a gorilla-
like antiiropoid. The gorilla was the first vision of all,
and then it appeared to be completely an animal.
Later, the patient recognized the animal's self-impor-
tant and bombastic attitude as his own, and the more
he did, the more the image changed into a more hu-
man one, that of a gigantic and monkey-like man
that he called "the bully." At the end of the fourth
hour, I anticipated that the effect of the drug would
not last more than two hours or so and I saw little
development, if any, in the nature of the patient's ex-
perience for the past hour. In view of this, I decided
to interrupt what seemed to be a changeless meiry-
go-ro\md of imagery by means of a brief administration
of carbon dioxide. I hoped that the inhalation of the
 gas would bring about a transient weakening of the
ego functions and a release of heretofore unconscious
 material. It happened that the patient could not tol-
220              The Healing Journey
erate more than ten inhalations, for he felt that   he—
the boastful giant —  ^was being shoved up through a
tube so that his head was pressing with tremendous
force against the ceiling, and it would certainly break!
   After this moment of impotence and fear of death,
there was a change in the patient's feeling tone and in
the content of his conversation. Not only did he see
more of the bully in himself, wanting to threaten
others in order to feel safe, but also the child under the
bully — a greedy child wanting affection that he did not
dare let others see.   Now    the giant appeared to him
with a big chest but small legs, and wearing the short
pants of a child. Many reminiscences followed, and
these had a quality of confession, for the patient was
expressing more and more of his weakness, guilt, and
insecurity.
   Fearing that the session would be over before reach-
ing a definite goal, I used CO2 once more, and this
time with an even more dramatic consequence, for
the result was a state of ecstasy, the taste of which
remained as the patient's dominant feeling for the rest
of the day: The sun was at the other end of the tube!
   The patient spent the following hour in what I can
best describe as an adoration of the sun. Not the
physical sun, which had already set, nor a hallucinated
sun, but whatever it is that is symbolized in it. As I
remember that tinie, as we sat, silent at times, and at
times talking, I picture the sun above our heads almost
as another being in the room, for I, too, was drawn into
the patient's exultation and gratefulness toward the
fountain of life.
   I have commented upon how, with both iboga and
harmaline, a given theme can be either experienced or
merely contemplated as a sequence of images with
which the subject scarcely identifies. In this instance,
I believe that we are witnessing the primordial experi-
                                           —
ence—not in the sense of old, but eternal from which
have sprung both the solar myths and the conception
of God as light that still reaches us through the mean-
ing of the word "God" in most languages.
   We looked back on his experience throughout the
      —
day a compendium of his life. The gorilla in him.
               Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality              221