Doctor. A rocket. Did you mention a golden lion?
Patient. Yes, a golden lion. It      may have been on
  one of the     friezes   on a public building nearby.
  It looks like the      lion on a European royal coat
  of arms. It is an almost Oriental or Siamese
  lion. The features on the face of the hon, the
  mouth in particular, suggest this. It is standing
  on its hind legs, with its forepaws in the air,
  its mouth open, half-lungmg forward, as if it
   were attacking.
Doctor. Do you have any feeling about the color?
   This golden color?
Patient. It's a very yellow gold.
Doctor. Do you like the color?
Patient. Yes.
Doctor. How does it feel? . . . {Rest of question
   inaudible.)
Patient. Well, I can feel myself touching the lion.
   When    Itouch it, though, it tends to become a
   real lion. It loses its cold metallic cover and
   becomes warm        fur.
Doctor. Can you         talk to the lion?
Patient. He's turned into a real lion now, an
   African lion. He has a tremendous tawny
   mane that is very stiff and bristly. His eyes are
   yellow.
Doctor.    How   do you         feel    about   this lion?
Patient. I feelhe is my friend. He is like a dog
   I might have for a pet. But he is nonetheless,
   in his own domain, a fierce and wild animal.
1   30                   The Healing Journey
     Doctor. Is this a good feeling, being a friend of an
        animal in its natural state?
     Patient. Yes.
     Doctor. Maybe that's what the image conveys,
        this pleasantness of joining the wild animal,
        being accepted by the wild animals.
     Patient. I'm curious to know what things he could
        tell me if he could speak. The lion is turning
        and walking away toward the jungle.
     Doctor. Can you follow him?
     Patient. Yes. He's trotting now, and I have to
        trot, too, to keep up with him. Now he's loping.
        He's chasing an automobile. (Sounds of outside
        traffic on tape at this time.) There's a trainer,
        a man, running along behind the automobile.
        He jumps onto the rear bumper and hangs onto
        the back window. The car pulls away from the
         lion, the man riding on the back      of   it.   The   lion
         slows   down and stops, looking       after the car.
         Now     he's turning   around to talk to me.           He
         says,   "It's   too bad that one got away," or
        something like that.
     Doctor. What did it want to do?
     Patient. I'm not sure. He may have been going
        to attack the man. Or he may have been just
        curious. But he is hungry. It doesn't make any
       difference to him whether his meat be human
       or some other animal.
    Doctor. What does the lion do now?
    Patient. He is standing there licking his chops.
       You know, licking his mouth with his tongue.
    Doctor. What would you like from a lion?
    Patient. What would I like from a lion?
    Doctor. Or in a lion.
    Patient. Warmth is the first thought that comes
       to mind. Strength, I suppose. And I see children
       climbing on the lion's back and sliding down
       on his sides and rolling under him and climbing
       up again and sliding over his back ^having a —
       wonderful time. And he is standing there en-
       joying it aU.
    Doctor. Can you imagine yourself as the lion?
      Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious                                   131

 Patient.      No.
Doctor.     Assume you have                            a lion in yourself.    You
   would  like to play with the children as they
   are playing with the lion.   have a wild ani-         You
   mal    as   weU  {Rest of sentence inaudible.)
                                    .       .   .


Patient. I can do it better if I see tiie lion as a
   lioness. But somehow I don't see the lioness
   being as            .
                               .'
                                        .


Doctor. ... as lion-like
Patient. I guess I see the lion as a dog, a play-
   mate, whereas the lioness is strictly a mother of
   the children.
Doctor. For some purpose,                               it is   a lion and not a
   lioness.
Patient. All right, we'll                           go back to the   lion.   {Long
   silence.) I'm                 having a lot of trouble becoming
   the lion. I                 ^ess I know why. It's because I
   don't much feel like taking on the job that he
   is performing.
Doctor. Suppose you have the lion talk to you.
Patient. Talk to me? And those are my children?
   {Long silence.) It isn't going anywhere.
Doctor. Let's see if some conoimentary leads any-
   where. I see some themes in what you have
   been saying. There's a theme of nobility: the
   lion insignia, the chateau, the political figures.
   Not only nobility, but authority, let's say. Then
   there's the theme of the movement around a
  center    —
            galaxies, drum, merry-go-round. Then
  there's a theme of animal hfe, impulse          ^the                       —
  horses on the merry-go-round that became a
  stampede, wildness; then the cowboys, with re-
  volvers      .impulse, aggression. Then the lion.
                   .       .


  And the lion, I think, contains the three: the
  central role, the authority, the vitality, the ag-
  gression, and the nobility. I feel there's a place
  in your life for these feelings. It's something of
  your self-image that is being expressed, your
  ideal self. It should be very easy to enact the
  lion.
Patient. If        he were doing something. But he is
  just standing.        Very tired, and probably after
1 32                   The Healing Journey
       hunting  day, he's come to rest in the park.
                 all
       And byaccident some children come to climb
    on his back, and he's just too tired to do any-
    thing about it.
  Doctor. Try saying, as if you were the lion, "I'm
       tired. I've   been hunting         allday    ."
                                                     .    .


  Patient. I'm tired. It feels            good to have the        chil-
    dren scratching my back, but they're getting
    heavy. He's a Uttle afraid to start walking be-
    cause one of the children might fall off. And
    yet he also has the desire to slip out from under
    them and be gone before they realize he's gone.
  Doctor. Don't shift to the third person. "I'd like
    to slip out   .
                    ." .


  Patient.   Now       the children have          left.
   Doctor.   What do you          feel like doing, lion?
  Patient. Well,           he urinated.    It's   getting dark.    He
       iswalking slowly but very softly. He is walking
       down a road with cars and trucks coming to-
       ward him with headlights on. (Sound of traffic
       on tape in background.) He stays over to the
       side of the road, and they don't see him. Now
       it's a lioness. She is looking at the trucks, and

       the truck drivers aren't aware of her, but she
       is thinking that if they weren't in the trucks,
       they would make a good dinner for her. And
       that although lions know what trucks are, she's
       wondering if the truck drivers know anything
       about lions. She is starting to hunt. She is
       walking down a dusty path trying not to stir
       up any dust. There's a log by the side of the
       path. A   beggar in a tattered leather coat hob-
       bles around behind the log, puts his hand on
       the shoulder of a man who was sitting there
       before he came along, and starts talking to
       him. The beggar has gray hair and ... I don't
       know. The log has become a log cabin. The
       lioness sees a httle snake crossing the path in
       front of her. She has no interest in eating it
       Its taste would not be very good. Now the
       lioness is walking along an exquisitely designed
       walkway which is made up of inlaid tiles. It's
      Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious       133