lusion. Others stress attending to the experience of the
moment, illusory as it may be, for only attention to it
will show that illusion is the reflection of reality on the
rippled surface of the mind and will lead from the
reflection to the original ligjit. From my own experi-
ence, I have developed great faith in the person's own
motivation to follow any of these paths at a given
moment and respect for his natural rhytiim in Ster-
nating from one to another. At times, he will need cen-
teredness above all else; at others, feeling in touch with
his true feelings and impulses, he will want to explore
the world from these, carrying them into realization.
His groundedness in the peak experience will turn hell
into purgatory for him, but if in his outgoingness he
feels lost, he will again need to withdraw to the center.
The rhythm may become evident in a single session or
during several, fiiitial ecstasy may make purgatory pos-
sible for some. To others, the gift of grace may be
unavailable at first, and they will reach serenity only
after repeated confrontations of the terrifying, along
with the discovery that there is nothing to fear.
   I tend to distrust the one-sidedness of drug experi-
ences both in the direction of joy and suffering, thmk-
ing that the one may involve avoiding the issues and
the other a bias in favor of personal striving and hard
work. What I do when prompted by such suspicion is
probably best told by the clinical material in the forth-
coming chapters.
                                             CHAPTER n

                                   MDA, THE
                           DRUG OF ANALYSIS



MDA   (methylenedioxyamphetamine)            is   an amina-
tion product of safrol, just as   MMDA is obtained from
the amination of myristicine. Safrol and myristicine
are essential oils contained in nutmeg; they are some-
what psychoactive and quite toxic. As is the case with
MMDA, MDA        has not been found in nature, but the
hypothesis has been put forward that both might be
produced in the body by amination of their parent
compounds, which would in turn explain the subjective
effects of nutmeg, already acknowledged in the Ayur
Veda,i where it is designated as mada shaunda ^nar-  —
cotic fruit.
   The psychotropic effects of    MDA were accidentally
discovered by G. Alles,^ who ingested 1.5 mg. of the
chemical for the purpose of assessing its effects on cir-
culation. Alles' experience was mainly one of height-
ened introspection and attention, but at the time of the
onset of subjective effects he saw illusory smoke rings
about him, which led him to believe that     MDA   would
be a hallucinogen in sufficient amounts. From my own
research with the drug, this does not quite appear to
be the case. In a first study designed to describe its
effects in normal individuals, not one of eight subjects
reported hallucinations, visual distortions, color en-
  1 Ancient Hindu scripture deaUng with medicine and the art
of prolonging life.
  2 The discoverer of amphetamine;
                             23
24               The Healing Journey
hancement, or mental imagery, while all of them ev-
idenced other pronounced reactions: enhancement of
feelings, increased communication, and heightened re-
flectiveness, which led to a concern with their own
problems or those of society or mankind. Further ex-
periments with  MDA      in neurotic patients in the con-
text of psychotherapy have confirmed such effects, but
here physical symptoms were of frequent occurrence,
and visual phenomena were described by most indi-
viduals at some point of tiieir experience. Yet the most
characteristic feature of the experience of these subjects
was one which we will here call age regression. ITiis is
a term employed to designate the vivid re-experiendng
of past events sometimes made possible by hypnosis,
wherem a person actually loses his present orientation
and may temporarily beUeve himself to be a child in-
volved in a situation of the past. Age regression
brought about by    MDA      differs in this last respect,
however: such loss of awareness of the environment
and the conditions at the time of the experience seems
to be more typical of hypnotic regression, whereas in
the MDA-elicited state the patient simultaneously re-
gresses and retains awareness of the present self. Yet
in both instances the person more than conceptually
remembers the past, as he may vividly recapture visud
or other sensory impressions inaccessible to him in the
normal state, and he usually reacts with feelings that
are in proportion to the event. This is the same pro-
cess   term^  "returning" in dianetics, and which can
range     the way from hypemmesia to repetition of a
        all
past experience in which not only the old feelings are
agam felt but physical pam or pleasure and other sen-
sations, as the case may be.
   Age regression has been observed by some psycho-
therapists using LSD or mescaline, and others, using
the term more loosely, claim that this is a constant
aspect of such experiences, in that there is a shift to
the pre-verbal mode of mental functioning character-
istic of early childhood, and a temporary suspension
of schemata and behavior patterns.
   Regression with   MDA    is something more specific