In a similar fashion, the cosmic "I       am" has become      a
more earthly "I am I."
  The patient has not danced, though, and            this sug-
gests that there   stillmay be a barrier to her wish and
that the process    that we have been following may be
incomplete. In fact, as sometimes happens with in-
complete ibogaine experiences, she went on remi-
niscing the events of the session and visualizing occa-
sional images for about twenty-four hours. At this
point, impersonating a huge saurian with crocodile-
like skin that she has seen, she berates the monster
and screams at the top of her voice:

  I   am   horrible, black, gray, hard!
  I live in this horrible underground cave.
  I   want to be alone. I don't want life around me.      I
       want to be alone, alone.
  A    queen, powerful in this solitude,
  I   am  the queen of the darkness.
  I   aaaam   the beeeast!
  I   want to screech, roar, howl, destroy.
  I   want to kill, break, pierce, crush, scratch, smash,
       shatter, tear, squash.
  I am implacablel
  I am implacableW
  I am implacableUl
  I am implacable with myself.


   Wherever "monstrous" instinctive energies are being
controlled, an equally powerful monster must be there
to do such controlling, and it is just such a repressive
operation that the person must recognize as her own
doing before she can redirect its power. What in a
previous moment had been mildly experienced by the
208                      The Healing Journey
patient as a laugh of scorn from her "top dog" (Ma-
ria) has now emerged as the implacable monster it is,
and she has discovered the presence of the monster in
her everyday         self.
     The   results of this          session were,   as could   be ex-
pected, a significant gain in spontaneity and in freedom
to express anger/ The change was visible in the pa-
tient's movements, which became more supple, and in
her facial expression, now more tender and responsive
to feelings. This was the third session she had had with
pharmacological agents, the other two having been with
LSD-25 and MDA. The former, a year before, was an
experience of discovering beauty in the external world
and yet seeing herself           as ugly,   which dramatically       dis-
played her seS-rejection and pointed to the work to be
done   m  herself. MDA, six months later, led her for
the first time to the "I am F' experience, where she
realized the distinctness of her own feelings and points
of view in contrast to the stereotyped attitudes she had
picked up throughout her lifetime. The session with
ibogaine was the first in which her instinctive life was
touched, and it was after this that the most noticeable
change occurred, according to both the patient's self-
perception and the view of others.
   Summing up, we can see the psychological process
throughout the session above as one of a progressive
recognition, acceptance, and expression of impulses.
What had       reached consciousness as fleeting and
                 first

threatening images (suffused with both aggression
and sensuality) became more and more detailed and
led to the idea of dancing, to actual movement, to
sexual arousal, and to the patient's shouting at the
top of her voice. More precisely, we can speak of an
unfolding of repressed instincts side by side with an
unfoldmg or expression of "phantoms"—the "intro-
                                                  the
jects," the top-doggish monsters which constitute
clamp that holds down the unpulses. Yet these   phan-
toms are nourished by the blood of the repressed. It
                                                patient s
isprecisely in these guardian-monsters that the
                                       the  phantoms    a
energy is imprisoned, and in giving
                     eventually the energies they have swal-
voice,     it

lowed that speak
                is
                             —
                             ^the   patient's impulses — ^herself.
                Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality             209
   I think that we should not minimize the process of
impulse expression depicted above in our usual con-
cern  — the legacy of psychoanalysis   — ^with insight, in-
terpretation, and the understanding of psychodynam-
ics. I think that ibogaine can facilitate an openness to
impulse that leads to learning, so that an avenue of
expression remains open thereafter. This may be un-
derstood as a corrective experience in that the patient
has the opportunity to discover that what he feared to
let out is not really threatening or unacceptable.
   One of the most clear-cut results that I have seen
after an ibogaine treatment was that of a man with a
homosexual history who had married, but who felt
unrelated to his wife and physically uninterested in her.
Although he expressed "castration feelings" in his ses-
sion, these were left mostly unanalyzed, as was his hy-
pothetical fear of women. Instead of this, when he felt
sexually aroused at one point in the session, he went to
the bathroom and thougjit that he would masturbate.
But when he attempted to do so, he realized that this
would only be a substitute for intercourse and that
what he wanted was a woman. He then imagined that
he had his wife in his arms and started moving as in
            —
intercourse ^rigidly first, as in real life, but then with
greater freedom and suppleness. He felt now that his
legs and body were fashioned expressly to serve this
function, and his movement became rhythmical and
musical. As he felt closer to orgasm, he realized how
perfectly bodies are conceived; he became aware of the
exact anatomy of man and woman, and he felt that
the woman was not merely the receptacle of his semen
but for all his being. With his semen, his very being
flowed and flowed into the feminine body that received
him as he underwent the process of a terrible yet
pleasurable disintegration.
   This was not a physical orgasm, but what he called
"psychological orgasm," without even an erection.
Nevertheless, it was followed by a sensation of ful-
fillment.
  I   have described the event with   all   the detail in the
patient's description, because only this detail conveys
the quality of experience. This episode amounts to no
210                       The Healing Journey
more than about    five minutes in a session of six hours,
in which many issues were covered, but it is signifi-
cant in that this was the first time that he had really let
go in sexual intercourse with his wife, even though in
imagination, and it proved not to be the last, for it was
the beginning of their sexual and emotional closeness.
   The patient's experience conveys much more than a
simple episode of sexual arousal and "release of ten-
sion." What he described is much more in the nature
of an archetypal experience of opening up to the
archaic sexual pattern in the species and understand-
ing from within the relationship between the sexes. In
enacting to
patient    in
                 some
                the
                            extent the sexual scene ^just as the
                          previous example enacted her ritual
                                                                —
movements       —   ^he    lent       reality   to   his    inspirations    and
erased the fears to which he had been conditioned
throughout his life history. The experience seems to
have acted as an opening for further exploration and
development rather than precipitating a drastic change.
The patient, who had traveled a long way to consult
me, returned to his country and wrote after six months:
"I feel closer to my wife. Even the fact of having told
her that I did not love her seems to have contributed
to my feeling of closeness. Things that exasperated me
to the limit don't bother me much now, and I feel
desire for her more often. Our sexual relations are
more complete and more                      like     sharing.   I   feel   freer
in   making     love,     and     I    am
                                    more. I do not
                                            enjoying       it

feel trapped in marriage as before, and I feel that
we have more in common. I think that I know her
better."


I have thus far dealt with processes of spontaneous
self-expression in imagery, word, or action, with their
elicitation by such means as the guided daydream, re-
dreaming of past dreams, photographs, and with ways
of handling different kinds of material through con-
frontation and impersonation; the latter may on occa-
sion (with ibogaine as in the use of Gestalt therapy
without drugs) lead to elaborate play-acting. There is
still one situation that I want to discuss, not only be-

cause I have encountered it in about one out of every
                                                               1



                  Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality           21