sleep but not overcome or killed, as the ego is shat-
tered with the mystic's enlightenment, as the "old
man"       or "outer   man"   dies   when the "new man" or
"inner     man"   is   bom   at   some point in the successful
spiritual quest.
  Much of what has been said above applies to some
extent to experiences elicited by certain spiritual dis-
ciplines,    environments, or personal "contagion." Sim-
ple retreat from the world, for instance (whether that
of a simple life, or that of the monk and the Indian
sannyasin, who have given up all attachments), falls
into the same pattern of avoiding certain hindrances,
distractions,and conflicts that detract from the pos-
sibilityof peak experiences. It is certainly a greater
challenge to maintain a state of centeredness and gen-
uineness in the midst of pushes and pulls of family life
in an urban setting than in a cave in the Himalayas.
And yet retreat may be of invaluable help for one who
needs to find himself before he knows what he wants
from others and what he wants to do with his life.
Likewise, in many forms of meditation, body and mind
are relieved of the habitual inner agitation that pre-
cludes the desirable inner states that are being sought.
Here, too, peak experiences are made possible by the
suppression of stimuli in which they would ordinarily
be drowned. Yet such transient experiences obtained
in solitude and silence while facing a white wall with
a mind empty of thoughts are not mere evasions of
the complexities of life, but a source of strength to
return to it and deal in a better way with the prob-
lems that it poses.
   In drug-elicited peak experiences it is sometimes
clear that a similar withdrawal from conflict areas has
proceeded quite spontaneously, and we may approach
such moments in the same light as those arising from
meditation. Their negative aspect is that they constitute
a healthy contact with reality in only a narrow range
of experience, bypassing the domain where lie the per-
sonality defects. Their positive aspect is that such
avoidance of difficulties may be functional, consisting
a necessary step toward the achievement of partial in-
       The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy     19

tegration. Once some centeredness has been achieved,
the following step will be that of extending it into the
periphery of personality, just as the ultimate end of
meditation is its extension to ordinary life in the form
of an enduring self-awareness and depth. Avoidances
may be suspected as an underlying condition of what
I like to call partial peak experiences—those that,
thou^ intense, cover only a fragment of the range of
qudities. Some persons, for instance, exhibit vivid aes-
thetic and religious feelings but have a gap in the area
of human feehngs that would be expected to lie be-
tween such qualities in the value continuum. Were per-
sonal relationships considered at that point, ecstasy
would probably be dissolved, engulfed in anxieties and
resentments, but the individual unconsciously wards oflE
such inner disturbance in order to afford clarity in
other areas of experience. For others, the gap or
avoided area may be different. There are persons who
may see everything as beautiful except themselves, so
that the tihought of their personal life or the sight of
their reflection in a mirror can turn their heaven into
hell. For others, it may be the perception or thought
of people in general that is avoided, such as in Hux-
ley's famous first mescaline session reported in The
Doors of Perception. In still others, everything can
flow beautifully so long as then: eyes are kept closed
and contact with the environment avoided, and in still
others external reality is enjoyed, but isolation and
closing of eyes is avoided because of the anxiety that
arises from the unfolding of fantasy.
   Such avoidances are essentially an expression of
phobic areas in die everyday personality, and, as in
psychotherapies in general, there is a choice between
two strate^es to deal with them: bypassing the blocks
in order to develop the sane aspects of the individual,
or facing the blocks by plunging into the turmoil of
distressful and avoided feelings. The first choice, in
drug experiences, might be conceived as a short-cir-
cuiting into heaven, after which the situation on "earth"
is not essentially changed or understood better. The
second is the choice of dealing with earthly difl&culties
with only slight chances of being able to rise above
20                The Healing Journey
them, but with more chances of effectmg change.
Again, the choice between the two kinds of experience
might be likened to the choice between the intrinsically
valuable one of looking out through an open window
and that of attempting to open a window next to it
that  is at present closed. The outcome of the latter
choice will possibly be no more than a few inches of
light instead of the wide view of the landscape that
COTld be perceived from the window that is already
open, but there will remain the lasting benefit of one
more place in the house from which to enjoy the worid.
   This is not to signify that the first kind of experi-
ence does not have value in bringing about change in
personality. The fortifying virtue of intrinsic value can
give a person the strengtih and even the desire to re-
move tiie blocks to increased experiencing of value.
The sight of the goal is what stimulates the wanderer,
as the drawing closer to it brings it better into view.
Moreover, just as a young oak needs protection from
rabbits, yet the mature tree can serve to leash an ele-
phant, so the avoidance of conflict may have its place
while emphasis is laid on the development and expres-
sion of tite healthy sides of personality. Eventually,
this healthy growth, stimulated through peak experi-
ences in the course of therapy, artistic endeavor, or life
situations, may invade and replace the disturbed do-
mains of the individual's functioning.
   So here we have two approaches to the process of
psychological healing that are opposite and yet com-
patible and even complementary.
  The peak   experience is what Christian theology re-
gards as grace: a  ^  that can come to both saint and
sinner, and that the individual can either use or fail
to use. The experience of psychological disharmony,
on the other hand, is the challenge of the via purga-
tiva, the mountain to be climbed. The hi^er the pil-
grim is on the moimtain the more likely he is to receive
the ever-downpouring gift from heaven. The greater
the gift of grace received, the stronger will be his sense
of direction, his hope and faith, his will to climb.
   Both approaches are well documented in the spir-
itual practices of mankind. Some stress the direct
       The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy       21

seeing of reality and dispelling of the phantoms of     il-