Asthese lines show, a basic concern of the patient
after the  second drug experience is that of accepting
the inevitability of her own death. Only at one point
during the session proper was she accepting it, as
she felt herself that red sensuous woman who danced
across the dangerous street. She "doesn't care" about
the dead and allows her own death, in an attitude of
seeing that "that's the way it is." She doesn't oppose
                                      —
death as she doesn't oppose life she is definitely
sexual and takes delight in every movement of her
dance. In not opposing life or death, in allowing them
to be, beyond good and evil, she transcends life and
death. By letting them be, she becomes their embodi-
ment, as her dance is the embodiment of her inner
music. Yet aside from this moment, she is the battle-
ground of Eros and Thanatos. Her death wish answers
the demand of a God for whom sex is evil, that re-
vengeful God, thirsty for blood, at the processions in
southern Italy, whom she had buried in her mind and
avoided in churches. Yet she needs him, and she must
suffer his condemnation: "I need God, and I am all
sex." Not only did she feel guilty after the session, but
she became frigid and on occasion experienced during
sexual intercourse the same anxiety that she used to
feel in the street.
   The patient's oneiric life became very rich in the
                                                    "



         Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious       161

months   that followed the session, and her dreams pre-
sented symbols first contemplated with harmaline or
their equivalents. One of the dreams reiterates the
ideas of dance, dark skin, and dissociation into two
persons that were part of the previous two experi-
ences and which reflects her present sexual guilt: "I
was two persons at the same time. One, naked, was a
Negro woman dancing, while the other watched in
horror."
   The following dream shows a connection between
the sexual impulse and the tiger theme: "I was by a
swimming pool, letting myself be tanned by the sun.
My   friend Alfredo appeared. Then I saw myself cov-
ered by a sort of tiger skin. Under that I wore a biki-
ni. He uncovered me. I said, 'No, Alfredo, cover me.'
*Why?' 'Because this way I look more naked.'
   The patient's free association also underwent a
marked change during this period. Not only did she
display a greater prominence of sexual matter in her
thoughts, as in her dreams, but sexuality extended into
her memories, too, and for the first time she became
 aware of a sexual aspect in her relationship with her
father. The scene in her first harmaline session when
she kissed her father on the mouth was a clue, which,
like a magnet, attracted unexamined memories. "I
loved my mother, and more than that," she once said,
"but my father was mine. He used to tell me that when
I was older we would go to Paris all by ourselves. He
kept his promise. I have the feeling that we were a
couple. We had a world of our own that we shared."
Yet the attachment and unconditional acceptance that
she expressed with regard to her father were in poi-
gnant contrast with the facts she remembered, which
presented the father as a very violent, arbitrary man
and suggested him as the source of her own uncon*
scious (now half-conscious) persecutor. The hostility
which she did not consciously experience or express
did speak through her dreams of that time, as it por-
trayed in the following scene:
  "I dreamt about      my father. It was in a basement
full of corpses.   They were deformed, mutilated, killed
1   62                    The Healing Journey
at war. This was something related to Warsaw. The
resistance of the ghetto. I  walked over them, stepping
on them. I felt pleasure in their tortured condition. I
picked up a severed head and knew that it was my
father's. I felt that it was all right that he was dead."
   Shortly after the time of this dream (four months
after her second harmaline experience), the patient
underwent another session, ^ and now, for the first time,
her feeling of guilt turned into resentment, frustration,
and sadness in confronting her father. The following
is one of the more expressive passages in my notes:



      Doctor.      What makes you        cry?
      Patient. I don't      know. Everything.
                                          I could cry for
          days and days. I am not wicked. I have been
          very lonely. I would have liked to have a little
          brother or sister. I was never allowed to play
          with anybody. My mother used to take me to
          my granny's to play with my cousins, but al-
          ways on the quiet and for a short time, because
          my father would hit me and raise hell with her
          if he knew. He didn't dare hit her, though. He

          knew she was like a wild animal that could
          literally kill him. I don't blame her at all. I
          loved my eranny so much! But this brute of an
          old man did not let me visit her. I had to lie,
          and Iving was bad. And later he was surprised
           that I couldn't stand other children. They were
           strange creatures; they knew games whose exis-
           tence I didn't even suspect. Perhaps I didn't
           even conceive that there were games for chil-
           dren! I hate this old man! He made her suffer
           so, so much! And how good my mother was to
           me! She was not bom to be caged, and this
           old man fussed and fussed and fussed! About
           stupid details. Why couldn't I visit my granny?
           It was not that he didn't like them. I think he
           felt jealous. He wanted me all        for himself.
         Doctor.    And you gave him that        exclusiveness?
      3   On   this occasion,   100 mg. of mescaline were added to 500
    mg. of harmaline.
             Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious    163

    Patient. Later, yes. But I don't think I did. I had
       no choice. War was at its peak, and I had no
        choice but to be with them. But it was he who
        took me everywhere. My mother didn't any
        more. Perhaps she preferred not to, to avoid
        fights. And these were always my fault. He
        wouldn't let me drink water. Once he knew I
        had drunk some, and he got angry with her. It
        was my fault, but I had to drink water! He
        shouted so much that I wanted to leave the
        house . . .


           He had so much life, so much energy, and
        all of it went into idiocies. He didn't pursue
        what he liked most, which was mathematics.
        He is like a great absurdity. He has caused me
                                           —
        much harm, without being evil that is what's
        sad.