The        fact that the patient   was temporarily    precipi-
tated into his neurotic pattern            when   the girl rejected
him shows that such rejection had not really been
taken into account when he felt himself so invulner-
  3            it "sane," I am assuming that this is the natural
      In calling
state and that only because there is such a thing as a natural
state can it be manifested spontaneously and without learning.
Learning becomes necessary only for its "realization," ie., its
translation into practical reality.
                 MMDA and the Eternal Now                                    89

able.  Only after being confronted with                    it   and recover-
ing   from his fall, could he really say,                   as   he actually
did, "It doesn't      matter   if   a   girl   doesn't love us."
   I believe that in such confrontation with experience
(or its possibility) lies the healing property, as well
as the insight that gives permanence to the new con-
dition. Such confrontation may take place during the
session with   MMDA,    if the patient is led to consider

the conflictive circumstances of his               life,    or later,      when
iving is unavoidable. In the present case, I did lead
the patient to a contemplation of his difficulties when
le seemed ready to look at them with pleasurable
:alm, but I did not realize how he was dissimulating
lis   avoidance of certain issues. This was his                    first   con-
cern afterward ("things that did not                 come        out"), and
le aptly describes the effect of the session, later, as
'an antiseptic that eliminated the infection for two
>r three days, so I felt completely rid of neurosis."
  It is to be expected that the more the issues have to
>e avoided in order not to disrupt a "peak experi-
mce," the more unstable and short-lived such experi-
mce will be in the midst of ordinary living conditions.
3ut I use quotes here for "peak experience" to imply
hat such an experience has an element of self-decep-
ion in it, in that it is possible only at the expense of
epressing, or not looking at, what is incompatible with
t.    What can   the validity be of feeling that we can
iccept death     ifwe are unable to imagine it? Yet I
 >elieve that in      most pharmacologically induced peak
 experiences there is a substratum full of issues that
 cannot be confronted.
   We can ask ourselves, therefore, which may be the
 tore desirable: to take a directive attitude during the
 /CMDA session and attempt to confront the patient
 nth what he is avoiding, at the risk of disrupting a
 tate of partial integration, or to let the patient ex-
   rience as much as he can of his newly discovered
 |enteredness, so that the taste of it remains while he
  ter   meets life as it comes.
     In truth, there is not so much room for choice as
     might seem. In my experience, only about 25 per
     nt of the persons react to                MMDA
                                         with a spon-
90                   The Healing Journey
taneous peak experience, while an additional 30 pei
cent arrive at it after working on their problems. In
the latter instance, there can be little doubt that the
experience has occurred in spite of, and as the result
of, the resolution of at least some of the person's
conflicts, which has generally been the object of most
of the session. As to the former 25 per cent, it is
generally my practice to allow the experience to pro-
ceed undisturbed for about two hours and then devote
the remaining three to the examination of the patient's
life and problems. In doing this, I am assuming that
I can help the patient more by being present at this
confrontation than by leaving it to him to experience
in the following days, and that remembering life at
the time of a peak experience may be easier than
remembering it at the time of Kving. In actual prac-
tice, this does not violate the patient's inclinations, for
he   is             open to whatever is proposed, in
          either feeling
his acceptingmood, or else feeling naturally drawn to
such self-examination. This was true in the case
(among others) of the man in our illustration who,
after about two hours of enjoying his heavenly state,
wanted to know where his hell was and to ascertain
whether his present state was really valid or justified.
  Sometimes, the crucial confrontation occurs sponta-
neously in vivid imagery, as was the case of a patient
who had always felt insecure in his work as a manager,
and would compensate by adopting a bossy attitude.
Toward    the end of his    MMDA  session, he imaged
himself at work in the present state of relaxed warmth
and really learned from such creative fantasy how this
was truly possible, how his defensiveness was unneces-
sary and his undistorted expression of himself more
satisfying and not inconvenient. There was very little
talking with this patient, but his mood and behavior
at   work changed.
     That there are   limits to   how mucha person wants
to confront at a given time is also true, and I think
that the therapist's possibilities are more limited here
than it would seem. The patient will not hear, or he
will just pretend to hear, or his feeUngs wiU not parallel
his thinking, his mind will go blank or be filled with
                    MMDA and the Eternal Now              91

distracting thoughts,and so on, and this will have to
be accepted. Moreover, there may be a natural wisdom
in the unconscious regulating process that controls the
length of his steps toward integration. All the therapist
can do in these instances is be available to offer what
he can.
   Another instance of such spontaneous confrontation
in imagery is described by a patient in the following
words:

     Then something     significant happened. First I
  just felt something had happened, something was
  different. As if I had forgiven myself for some-
  thing. Then I became convinced that the forgive-
  ness was associated with the throwing-up some
  time earlier. Then I found myself in fantasy mov-
  ing about within my ofl&ce at the college. I dis-
  covered that I no longer was caught up in the
  self-flageUating depression that I had been in dur-
  ing the last week. I was free and at ease.
     Then I had moments of realization of a quaUty
  of peace of mind that I almost never have (in
  my anxiety, computing, rehearsing, manipulating,
  worrying, and other habitual states), and the
  quality was       —
                 and still is today, after fifteen days
  —  a  state of  being able to let time pass with
  graceful ease, even to luxuriate and enjoy friends
  in the   moment.

  What       then, in practical terms, that the patient
           is it,
may be  offered in such moments, when his state of
mind could not be better? In general, I would regard
the following immediate aims as conducive to the
stabilization of a      peak experience:



                        1. Explicitationor Expression of the
                            Present State and Point of View

It may be assumed that the change that has taken place
in the subject's feelings is not just a matter of meta-
                                                             j           ,




92                     The Healing Journey
bolic processes in his nervous system, but that is en-
tailsan implicit change in the perception of people or
relationships, or in his values. Since    it is   such changes
that    may   support the  new feeling state if they endure,
it is   desirable to   make them as conscious as possible,
and thus help him consciously discard the implicit dis-
torted views that were supporting the symptoms. Thus
somebody may no longer be seen as a persecutor, or
the individual may discover his own worth in an area
where he had been rejecting himself. The whole ap-
proach amounts to asking the patient why everything
seems all right to him now (or why it is unnecessary
to worry so that he may translate into concepts his
implicit understanding).
     In the case of the patient in our first illustration,
this led  him to a greater awareness of his self-punitive-
ness, as was mentioned earlier. Another realization
that helped him in the expression of his new state of
mind was the one he described in terms of "nothing
matters," meaning really something Uke "nothing can                  |




take away from tiie joy of existing, which is an end
iu itself." The value of expression is that its products             I