Harmaline is the main alkaloid in the seeds of Pe-
ganum harmala, a plant native to Central Asia and
Syria, and which now grows wild along the Mediter-
ranean coasts of Africa, Europe, and the Near East, in
Persia, Afghanistan, and northeast Tibet. These seeds
have been used for centuries and appear in the Spanish
and Italian pharmacopoeia as "semen Harmalae sive
rutae sylvestris.'* They constitute an article of com-
merce from Persia to India, where medical tradition
recognizes them as an emmenagogue, lactogogue, eme-
tic, anthelmintic, and disinfectant, and they are known
for their psychoactive effects.
  Aside from Peganum harmala, harmaline is also
found in the South American rain-forest climbers of
the genus Banisteriopsis, which provide the main in-
gredients of the drink variously called yage, ayahuasca,
and caapi, employed by the cultures settled along the
headwaters of the Amazon and the Orinoco systems.
This drink has been employed in the initiation of
shamans, in puberty rites, and, in some cultures, for
healing various ailments, and more generally, to in-
duce a state of clairvoyance; hence the name telepa-
thine once given to its active principle.
   Although in this chapter I shall be dealing with the
effects of harmaline only from the angle of psycho-
therapy, I want to mention that this alkaloid is of
special interest because of its close resemblance to
                           119
120              The Healing Journey
substances derived from the pineal gland of mammals.
In particular, 10-methoxy-harmaline, which may be
obtained in vitro from the incubation of seratonin in
pineal tissue, resembles harmaline in its subjective ef-
fects and is of greater activity than the latter. This
suggests that harmaline (differing from 10-methoxy-
harmaline only in the position of the methoxy group)
may derive its activity from the mimicry of a meta-
bolite normally involved in the control of states of
consciousness.
   The effects of harmaline in the dosage range of 4 to
5 mg. per kilogram of body weight by mouth (or a
total dose of 70-100 mg. intravenously) are a state
of physical relaxation, a tendency to withdraw from
the environment, keeping eyes closed and wanting
noises and sounds to be kept to a minimum, a certain
numbness in the extremities, and above all, very vivid
visual images, which may take the form of meaningful
dreamlike sequences. In addition to this, about 50 per
cent of the subjects experience nausea or vomiting at
some point in the session. On account of the symptoms
described, it follows that the ideal setting for the use
of this drug is a comfortable couch in a quiet, dark
environment.
   In a study carried out in 1964 of the subjective ef-
fects of harmaline, using volunteers who knew nothing
about the drug's effects, one of the most surprising
findings was that of the similarity of the content of
their visions, which in turn resembled those of the
Indians. Some of the more frequent items in the con-
tent analysis of the thirty sessions that   composed   that
study were tigers and animals in general, birds or
flying, dark-skinned men, death, and circular patterns
conveying the idea of a center, source, or axis.
   The recurrent expression of themes such as those
enumerated and the mythical quality of many of the
images reported by subjects leaves little doubt that
harmaline characteristically evokes the presentation into
consciousness of such transpersonal experiences (and
the symbols thereof) as Jung contemplated in speak-
ing of archetypes.
   For one sharing the Jungian point of view, it would
           Harm aline and the Collective Unconscious   121

be natural to think of the artificial elicitation of arche-
typal experience as something that could facilitate per-
sonality integration, and therefore psychological heal-
ing. Yet the observation of the psychotherapeutic
results of the harmaline experience was not the out-
come of anv deliberate attempt to test the Junrian
hypothesis. These results came as a dramatic surprise
in the above-mentioned study, even before the recur-
rence of images became apparent. Of the group of
thirty subjects who were our volunteers, fifteen experi-
enced some therapeutic benefit from their harmaline
session, and ten showed remarkable improvement or
symptomatic change comparable only to that which
might be expected from intensive psvchotherapy. Eight
of the ten were psychoneurotic patients, and another
had a character neurosis of which he was sliehtly
aware. These nine amounted to 60 per cent of the
subjects with obvious neurotic symptoms (N=15)
among the volunteers.
      My
       lack of further experience with pure harmaline
derives from my having been engaged, since the time
of the above research, in the study of harmaline com-
binations: harmaline-MDA, harmaline-TMA,i harma-
line-mescaline and others. Since my intention in the
present chapter is to present a view of the effects and
use of harmaline when employed by itself, I shall men-
tion only that these combinations can be useful in the
cases of individuals who, for psychological or physio-
logical reasons, do not respond well to the pure drug.
   It would be hard to offer a simple explanation for
the instances of improvement brought about by the
harmaline experience. Such improvement usually oc-
curred spontaneously, without necessarily entailing in-
sight into the particulars of the patient's life and con-
flicts. As in all cases of successful deep therapy, it did

involve greater acceptance by the patients of their
feelings and impulses and a sense of proximity to their
self.^ Statements like these, however, are not very ex-

plicit, and only case histories can adequately illustrate
the natu re of the process.

  1   TMA:   trimethoxyamphetamine.
122                The Healing Journey
   One of the first subjects to experience the effects
of the alkaloid was a young man who had spent five
years in rather unsuccessful psychoanalytic treatment
for an anxiety neurosis. His reaction after five or ten
minutes, soon after I had finished injecting the drug
into his vein,^ was an exclamation of wonder: "It is
unbelievable! Everything I do, everything I say, is a
distortion! I have been living for years without sus-
pecting what I really am. I must have forgotten as a
child, and only now can I feel myself again, my real
self!"
  This realization was the most important of the day
and one of the most important in his life. It was not
arrived at through reasoning, or analyzing a life situa-
tion, nor was it the outcome of any therapeutic inter-
vention on my part. The following is a description of
the subject's experiences during these moments:
   His first sensation upon receiving the injection he
describes as "an internal buzzing and physical anxiety,
as if I were to burst out through my nose, or my blood
were to explode out of my arteries; it also had a tran-
quility, like that of feeling a strong sun for the first
time in my life, or at the last instant, something like
seeing peace and life in the moment of death. It was
physical despair, as if my faculties would not respond
—  neither my voice, nor my movements, nor my
thoughts."
   After this               which may have lasted only
                initial stage,
five minutes,  he lost the fear and gave in to a rapid
flow of imagery which he scarcely reported, since his
effort to talk only interfered with the experience (and
he did not feel like interfering with it). Very soon,
while he was having imagery related to his childhood,
he achieved the insight that accounted for the ther-
apeutic benefit of the day: "I see myself as I am, and
this has no relation to the way I am living. I behave
in contradiction to myself, because I don't acknowl-
edge myself."
  2Harmaline may be used in intravenous injection if an
immediate onset and somewhat shorter duration of effects are
desired.
         Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious    123