Apparentiy,      psychoactive drugs, from barbiturates
               all
to ibogaine,    may cause either pleasurable states of
mind or unpleasant ones, states tiiat seem more desir-
able than the usual ones and others that are marked
not only by suffering but by lack of good thinking,
appropriate actions, or accurate perception of reality,
Huxley has described something of the characteristic
"heaven and heU" of mescaline, and those words have
become standard to many who are familiar with the
effects of the LSD-like hallucinogens. Yet there are as
many heavens and as many hells as there are drugs.
What a given individual's reaction is along the con-
tinuum may partiy depend on his constitution. Thus,
Sheldon has remarked that the active, forceful soma-
totonic tends to react to alcohol by becoming more
active or aggressive, the more sociable viscerotonic.
       The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy      5
more emotional and talkative, and the introverted   cere-
brotonic, more withdrawn and brooding.
   Yet, whatever the personality traits that may often
be predisposing to a given reaction to a given psycho-
active drug, it is clear enough for those discussed in
the book ^at a given individual may show reactions
of different types on different occasions of administra-
tion and also at different moments in the course of a
given session. Moreover, it seems fairly certain that
5ie elicitation of a "heavenly" or a "hellish'' experi-
ence depends greatly upon the person's attitude at the
moment, the surroundings, the relationship to the ther-
apist, and the latter's intervention during tiie session.
And since this allows for some measure of deliberate-
ness in the choice of an experience of one type or
another, it is desirable to understand what value each
of these may have to the aim of psychotherapy.
   What is the nature of these experiences, in the first
place—                                —
         ^the "positive" and "negative"  and what is it
that makes them pleasant or unpleasant? The gamut
of peak experiences, in ordinary life as in psycho-
pharmacological conditions in general, comprehends a
variety of states which, I would suggest, have in com-
mon tiheir being moments in which intrinsic values are
discovered or contacted.
   There are several ways in which we use the word
**value." More than indicating different kinds of value,
these point at altogether different psychological pro-
cesses that may give rise to value judgment. One of
them I would propose that we call "normative" value,
for here *Value" consists of the acceptance or rejec-
tion of something (person, action, object, work of art,
and so on) according to a pre-established rule. Such a
rule may be implicit or xmconscious, i.e., the process
of matching the ongoing perception of something
against it It may consist of a given standard of "good
taste," a notion of what a good person should be like,
what the good life consists of, and so on. In this
value-ascribing process, "value" is an idea-feeling-ac-
tion depending on the nature of past experience or
conditioning.
   But when we like the taste of an apple, when we
6                     The Healing Journey
enjoy breathing fresh air, or have a true experience of
beauty, love, or mystical rapture, *Value" is not some-
thing computed from the match or mismatch of the
ongoing experience with a standard, but the discovery
of something which seems to live in the moment and
was possibly imknown before. And, moreover, norms
                               —
have generally found origin in such discovery of value
before any norm existed ^**And God saw that it was
good.''
  The variety of experiences of intrinsic value may be
understood as a continuxmi or progression going from
the simplest level of sensuous delist to the most en-
compassing level of mystical rapture. The former is
the   domain of true pleasure, which is to be differen-
tiated  from most of the experiences that we usually
regard as pleasurable. These constitute not so much
the discovery of intrinsic value but the relief of tension
end-points of displeasure (thirst, hunger, etc.). En-
joyment of sense impressions is not boimd to need or
instinct, but, like all intrinsic value, is experienced as
something pertaining to the "object'' itself (the color,
the taste, tiie sound, and so on) and therefore seems
gratuitous. It could well be regarded as the most ele-
mentary form of love, in that it entails an appreciation,
a saying yes to reality in         its    detail, in its fabric,  or
in its stuff, ratiier than in    its     specific shapes   or beings
constituted by it. This is the quality that,            m    the do-
main of sound, Stokowski has called the body of
music, in contraposition to music's "soul," and has a
beauty of its own, much as does a person's body.
   But the soul of art is in the domain of beauty prop-
er, which differs from pleasure not only in quality
but    m   its   object.   Whereas the      latter consists   m    the
enjoyment of isolated sense impressions, in beauty it
is a whole that is appreciated: an object, symbol, or
person certainly endowed with sensory qualities but
not definable       m
                 terms of these. And so, just as good
music may  be  played on an instrument with poor tone
quality, a worthless painting may be made witii the
 most beautiful     colors.
         a sensory quality is for pleasure and what a
      What
 whole configuration is for beauty, a being is for love.
       The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy            7
And   as a thing   is   more than   its   sensory qualities, a
being is   more than   some-body. As a person has a
                        its
body or is expressed through the body, the spirit that
conceives a work of art speaks through it but is dif-
ferent from its particular shape. And the more we go
into a work, the closer we get to an encounter with
the spirit of the author conveyed by his style. Truly,
one of the deeper experiences in the perception of art
is one of love for the being expressed in it       —
                                               ^whether
that of Bach, Dostoevski, Van Gogh, or whoever has
created out of a "spirit" and not just decorated space
and time at random. (But to meet such a spirit truly,
we must be one, rather than a succession of random
happenings in that place that we call "I.") And when
we love an object, it is also a being for us, beyond its
physical appearance, which may be beautiful or not.
It was perhaps a love of all things that made Gauguin
say, "A thing is not always pretty, but always beauti-
ful." I am not saying that there is in the objects some
sort of object-soul, but only pointing out the quality of
our own possible experience. In one instance, the ob-
ject is just an aggregate of physical quaUties, and in
the other, we personify it to some extent and relate
to it as a being, an individual, sometimes implicitly, as
when we wash a dish with loving care, or more or less
explicitiy when we don't want to be parted from a dear
old sweater.
    Just as a being is the object of love, being in itself
is the object of the feelings conveyed by the words
holiness and sanctity, the wonder of existing, no mat-
 ter in what form      —
                      ^the miracle and gift of that afl&r-
mation that created this world: "Beingness," as Huxley
 translates Eckhardt's Istigkeit.
    And just as we are not gifted to find beauty in all
 forms or love aU beings, we are also limited in that
 we can sense beingness only through certain beings,
 certain things, sounds, persons; these stir our intrinsic
 religiosity, which may or may not be related to the
 idea of God or conventional religious conceptions.
    If peak experiences are those in which intrinsic
                   —
 values are met ^those ranging from the most elemen-
 tal afl&rmation of the perceptual data, through beauty
8                    The Healing Journey
and      love, to the aflfirmation of experience in itself, the
common ground     of things    —
                              then what is the other end
of the heaven-hell continuum?
  Superficially or descriptively, this corresponds to the
enhancement of syndromes that are well known in psy-
chiatric tradition:      psychosomatic or conversion mani-
festations, reactions of anxiety or depression, amplifica-
tions of character pathology, transient delusional states
or catatonia, and so on.
     More    deeply, I  would like to propose that these
states are only the     end products of a negation of in-
trinsic values.    Valuing, appreciation in aU forms and
on  all levels, is a pro-life force that not only aflSrms
the world but constitutes our only way of truly living.
And as there is this yea-saying to life» there is an
active nay-saying, a denying force tfiat draws a curtain
over the intrinsic joy of existence, renders us incapable
of lovmg and "unfaithful'' to the feelings that would
lead us to worship existence in itself.
     Adrug only makes an aspect of a person's psyche
more manifest. According to whether die individual is
able to accept it or not, he will be in contact with a
value or in conflict between his enhanced tendency and
his denying sub-self. Such conflict can naturally lead
to repression, substitutive symbolic expression througji
body or mind, reactive formations, anxiety about let-
ting go.
    Such experience is not without value, though, be-
cause   it entails such an unusual and often dramatic