is clear that his deep pleasure                 was   in feeling himself,
which       is   what he was       literally   doing: "I   felt   my shoul-
ders, the muscles on     arms,    my           my   abdomen,      my back;
I went on feeling myself  ^my legs, —               my feet It was met''
   ''And I was a right man, a beautiful                    man         in a cer-
tain way, extremely masculine. Man,                        it     is    a good
body    .    .   .   reflects   what he   is inside.''
   Througibout his entire life he had felt inadequate, he
had doubted himself in all ways, and now he knew that
he had felt himself to be u^y. He had even believed
that something was wrong witili his feet. Now he knew
how illusory M^ was, how it was all based on his lack
of perception of himself. About a month later, he would
say of this experience:
   'This feeling myself and finding myself in each part
of my body, which was a materialization of myself,
was something I loved, and at the same time I suffered.
I loved it because it was myself, I suffered because I
had for such a long time looked down on and post-
poned myself, even regarded myself as evil ^in terms            —
of an awkward and limited conception of myself. I felt
sorry for myself."
   He kept feeling his body, as he talked, for about a
half-hour, and soon (much against his ordinary style)
he had removed his shoes, opened his shirt, loosened
his belt.        He commented on how                he took delight in
feeling normal, symmetrical, well built,                 and how his
organism was a successful embodiment of himself in
                    and uniqueness. Then he talked of
all his individuality
touch as being     most reliable of the senses, the one
                          tiie
that permitted the most direct contact with reality in
all its richness. He digressed on the limitations of other
senses and of the intellect itself, of analysis and logical
constructions when it came to the grasping of ultimate
reality. What would this pure and simple act of fully
knowing be? This was possible only in God. What
wonder and mfinite beauty there was in God! Original
and final being in whom everything was initiated and
30                    The Healing Journey
to    whomeverything naturally flowed. He talked ex-
citedly in English for two hours without interruption
as he contemplated the evolution of man in his search
for God    —
          ^the Greeks, the Romans, and Phoenicians,
the Middle Ages in Europe, the Renaissance, capital-
ism, the estrangement of modem man and the need
for solutions.
   At this point, his enthusiasm      was clouded by a differ-
ent feeling. He looked as if          he were searching for
something and said, "This encountering of myself is
painful!" I repeatedly instructed him to express and
elaborate on his experience of the moment, but this he
rejected more and more: "It is not this, it is not this
moment, but something in my past. Something hap-
pened to me, and I don't know what."
   At this stage, I had to leave the room for some
minutes and I advised him to write during this time, as
this would keep his thinking more organized. So he
did, in large handwriting, about ten lines to a page,
with not a few words in large capital letters, such as I,
AM, and I. After nine pages, he became preoccupied
with a recurrent mistake he had made, which consisted
of writmg "m" instead of "n." It was this that was
bothering him when I came back, and he continued to
write in my presence as we talked. "The great problem
of the *n,' " he writes on the fifteenth page, ^'which is
it,   *m' or   V?   I feel anxiety. I find that   N   is   in   ONE.
One, one. ME. (I had written NE). Anxiety. Anxiety
about my sins. Sinner. Anxiety Anxiety I turn to GOD.
WHICH ARE           MY
                     SINS. The N. I get anxious.
   "The bread with worms that I saw as a boy in the
dining room. I still see it. It had holes, and in them
were worms [gusanos].

                             Gusano
                               UN
                              UNA
                             NANA''

  His associations have taken him from letter "n" to
the disgust at worms that he had imagmed in the din-
ing room bread and then to his nanny, his wet nurse*
                                                                 1



                   MDA, the Drug of Analysis                 3

Now    he   clearly evokes his feelmg for this nurse.    He
writes: "Affection with      some DESIRE.      I tremble."
  He   feels the   urge to understand something which he
anticipates as very important in connection with his
nanny, and, as he writes, he realizes that the substitu-
tion of "m'* for "n" means substituting   Mamafor Nana.
When he discovers this confusion, he writes several
times: "Nana and not Mama. Nana and not Mama."
                                          —
He then remembers more of his nanny ^how she took
him out for walks when he was only two to three years
old, how he slept with her and caressed her; how un-
conditional her love was, how at ease he felt with her.
He remembers her appearance, her fresh face, her black
hair, her open laughter. And as he remembers her, he
feels sadder and sadder, sad at having lost her, of not
having his nana any more. "Nanny left," he writes.
"Alone. Alone. Alone. Anxiety. Mother was part, not
all. Nanny was all. She left. Came to see me later.
Loved me. Painful wound. I am. With pain. I am
more myself. I am myself. I am myself with my nanny.
How   sad that she left. She gave me so much for noth-
ing. No! Because she loved me, more than her own
son. Poor boy, he lost his motherl She loved me so
much! She left, and I remained alone among others.
Mother. Searching for love."
   He could now see all his life as a beggmg for love,
or rather, a purchase of love in which he had been
willing to give in and adapt to whatever others had
want^ to see and hear. Here was the reason for his
lack of direction in life, his submissiveness. He had lost
something so precious, and felt so deprived! His
thougihts now turned to the period when he was left
"alone" with his parents. The change from Nana to
Mama involved moving from die kitchen to the dining
room. He felt constrained here, uncomfortable, un-
loved. Intimacy and warmth were now missing in his
life; he was not imconditionally accepted as he was any
more, but had to adapt, live up to certain demands, have
good manners. Yet         was something in his feelings
                        tiiere
at this stage —        he was experiencing again in the
                ^feelings
session—which he could not grasp adequately or even
feel clearly. There was more than pain, more than love
32                  The Healing Journey
for Nanny and loneliness. He felt anxious, and in this
anxiety lay something which he tried to understand
better. "What did you feel toward your parents?" I
kept asking, and no clear reply came at first. Then it
was the question, "Why did they let my nana go? Why
did my nana leave me? Why did you let my nana leave
me? Why?" It seemed to him that she had been fired.
Mother was jealous, perhaps, because he loved her
best, or because his father had an affair with her. "And
what do you feel in the face of this, now that they have
fired her?" His anxiety increased. "Did you accept this
without protesting? If you did, perhaps you felt
guilty.   .
           ." And now he has it: guilt. This is what he