Ballantine/
                "A revolutionary approach                24328/si
Monfiction
                 to psychiatric treatment"
                     Gay   Luce, author of   Body T/me



   WW-^^W^^

              New,          iches to Consc*
           THE HEALING JOURNEY
     New Approaches To Consciousness

     "Because of   its   unusual     clarity,   it   will   be an
Indispensable tool for Intelligent laymen seeking
reliable information."
     — Stanislaus Grof
       Maryland State Psychiatric Research Center




After the session, the subject wrote the following:
"I   have understood that there          Is   very    little   that
matters.    doesn't matter that the car doesn't
           It

work, that a girl won't love us, that they won't give
us the best appointments at the university, that
they say   I am a homosexual, that don't have   I



a lot of money or a kingdom, that my parents will
die, that Aunt Rose is as crazy as ever. It only mat-
ters, perhaps, to be able to Breathe deeply and
                                    "
feel here, now, enjoying the air




  Claudio Naranjo is a Chilean psychiatrist and
the author of several books and monographs on
psychology and meditation. He has studied at
Harvard, University of    Illinois   and Berkeley;          In re-

cent years he has been a major figure at the
Esalen Institute and in spiritual teaching programs
in California.
       ALSO BY CLAUDIO NARANJO
            *The One Quest
       The Psychology of Meditation
            (with Robert E. Ornstein)




^available in a Bal/antlne   Books   edition at your locai bookstore
             THE
       HEALING
      JOURNEY
New Approaches to Consciousness


     Claudio Naranjo




  BALLANTINE BOOKS   •   NEW YORK
Chapter     I,   "The Healing Potential of Agony and
Ecstasy,"      appeared, in slightly different form, on
            first

pages 94-111 of the Journal for the Study of Con-
sciousnessy Vol. 2, No. 2, 1969, edited by Dr. C. Muses.




Copyright   ©1973 by Claudio Naranjo
Preface Copyright    ©
                     1973 by Random House, Inc.

All rights reserved under International and Pan-American
Copyright Conventions.

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 73-7026

SBN 345-24328-5-150
This edition published by arrangement with Pantheon Books

First Printing: January, 1975


Printed in the United States of America



BALLANTINE BOOKS
A Division of Random House, Inc.
201 East 50th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022
Simultaneously published by
Ballantine BocAs, Ltd., Toronto, Canada
                        Dedication




To Franz   Hoflfman, Emeritus Professor of Physiology
and Director of the Center for Studies in Medical
Anthropology at the University of Chile, Santiago,
who   sponsored   my   career as research psychiatrist in
psychopharmacology and shamanism.

And

To all the experimental subjects and patients         of
                        —
whom I have written who did the same.
                                 CONTENTS



     Preface by Stanislav Grof       ix


     Foreword:
       Probe INTO Inner Space         xiii


 I   The Healing Potential of
       Agony AND Ecstasy     1


n MDA, THE Drug of Analysis               23

in   MMDA AND THE Eternal Now                73

IV   Harmaline and the Collective
       Unconscious       119

V    Ibogaine: Fantasy
       AND Reality       171

     Index     227

     About the Author          234
                                           PREFACE



With the increasmg knowledge about the nature and
dynamics of emotional disorders, it becomes more and
more obvious that for most of them no ovemi^t cure
will be discovered in the form of a new and miraculous
tranquilizer or antidepressant agent. Hie symptoms of
these disorders are usually deeply anchored in the per-
sonality structure of the patient, and their causal treat-
ment requires systematic psychotherapy that can trace
the involved problems to their original sources.
   According to the statistics, emotional disorders in/
most of Ihe countries of the world show a continuous
increase. This presents a very serious dUennna from
the point of view of effective therapy and prevention.
A  systematic psychotherapy such as psychoanalysis or
analytically oriented therapy is an extremely time-con-
suming procedure. It is financially accessible to only
a small fraction of the patients; and even if this could
be overcome, the number of psychiatrists and psychol-
ogists would have to be increased many times in order
to meet the demand for this specialized treatment.
   It is understandable that under these circumstances
much effort has been invested in developing methods
that could intensify and shorten the psychotherapeutic
process. None of the approaches that have been sug-
gested in the past has met the ideal criteria required
for brief but effective psychotherapy.
  In recent decades, two relatively independent streams
of experimentation and research seem to have yielded
promising results. The first of them is the use of chemi-
cal agents as adjuncts to psychotherapy, which after
                           ix
X                           Preface
the inconclusive and, as a whole, disappointing era of
baibiturates and amphetamines has experienced a real
renaissance after the discovery of LSD and some
other psychedelics. The second important innovation
is the development of new and rather powerful modi-
fications to psychotherapeutic techniques such as en-
coimter groups, Fritz Perls' Gestalt psychotherapy,
Lowen's bioenergetics, marathon sessions, Ida Rolfs
structural integration, Desoille's rive iveilli, Leimer's
guided affective imagery, and so on.
   Claudio Naranjo is an outstanding representative of
both major streams, and in his synthesis of drug-
assisted psychotherapy and the new experiential tech-
niques, he seems to offer an interestmg solution to
the problem of brief therapy.
   For many years, he has been closely related to the
Esalen Institute at Big Sur, California, which has been
the cradle of many of the new experiential techniques.
He ran a number of weekend seminars and experien-
tial workshops for Esalen and had a mutually enrich-
ing interaction with its staff members, who were
pioneers in various new techniques of psychotherapy.
As  a direct disciple of Fritz Perls, Qaudio has mas-
tered Gestalt therapy, used it successfully in his work,
and made   original contributions in this field. His activ-
ity has not, however, been limited to California only,
and he is well known as a lecturer and seminary leader
in many growth centers all over the country.
   Claudio Naranjo*s experience with drugs is even
more impressive than that with new psychotherapeutic
tedmiques. Over the years, he has experimented with
                                  —
more than thirty compounds ^mostly psychedelics and
amiAetamine derivatives—as adjuncts to psychother-
apy. He made a special journey by canoe up the
Amazon River to study yage^ with the South American
Indians. He brought back samples of this drug and
published the first scientific description of the effects
of its active alkaloids. Although he has worked with
    lA   South American vine, containing harmaline and other
alkaloids, used by shamans as part of their initiation and prac-
tices.
                           Preface                          xi