and avoided regions of the         soul,   whereby   it   is   dis-
covered that there is    nothing threatening or to be
avoided in them.
   There may be sorrow, or anger, as in the present
instance, but only through a fearless acceptance of such
can the sum of a person's experience be integrated
into the whole of a healthy personality.
   The cure of this patient can be viewed as a shift
from a way of being and feeling as he once learned
that he "should" be or that it was convenient for him
                               —
to be, to his "true" being ^that corresponding to the
imprint of his life experience on his constitution. It
                                            —
can be seen that his neurotic pattern "mask," ideal-
        —
ized self   consisted of a replica of his parent's dis-
torted perception of the boy and their own aspirations
for him, at a time when he felt alone and greatly
needed their love. A salient aspect of this was that they
saw him as crude and unintelligent and wanted him to
be well educated, well manner^, and refined. So they
forced him to withhold anything which would be "vul-
gar" and forced him to regard culture as a "must,"
without which he would have felt like a worthless sim-
pleton. The compulsive quality of he process made it
something rigid, which turned him into an over-formal,
unspontaneous, wordy intellectual incapable of enjoy-
ing simple things. Such a process of substituting an
image for life, a set of "shoulds" for true experience,
lies at the root of every neurosis, however different
the circumstances may be that lead to the building of
tihe mask and however unique its features.
   What seems unusual in this patient's history is the
neat demarcation line between a time of normal de-
velopment in an atmosphere of love, and that in which
he was faced with the demand of adapting to disturb-
ing influences. It is conceivable that such a shift from
Nana to Mama which caused a parallel shift from "be^
ing" to "appearing" may have been a source of diffi-
 culty for the boy in his speech, since he must have
 sought his nana in his mother and must sometimes
have called her by the wrong name. And as Nana and
 associated thoughts became forbidden to him, the
40                     The Healing Journey
word    itself, like   Mama, must have become        loaded with
the conflicting feelings.
   It was a happy though blind intuition which I had
in advising the patient to write, thus allowing the buried
conflict to emerge through decades onto his writing
pad. The channels between his past experience and
the present one of writing letters had been opened by
the agency of MDA, but it surely would not have be-
come apparent through the highly automatized activity
of adult speech. One can conjecture as to what mi^t
have happened if the patient had not been led into
writing. Would his repressed feelings and memories
have gained access to the present by another, different
route? Could it be that once the associative channels
are open, unification takes place along the path of least
resistance  —as when water falls down a mountainside,
changing its course to accommodate the obstacles in its
way?
  The   following histories may suggest an answer:
  The   first concerns a thirty-five-year-old man who
had been engaged for years in the discipline of a spir-
itual school in the hope of becoming a more complete
human being. He expressed this hope in his first inter-
view, pointing out that to be really a "man'* would
imply qualities such as a will, responsibility, freedom,
which he was far from having developed. However
true these thoughts may have been, it soon became ap-
parent that the patient's feeling of not being a com-
plete man involved a specific fear of his being a homo-
sexual, which he hardly dared confess to himself, let
alone to his spiritual guides. Such fear was part of a
persuasive feeling of insecurity, as there was a constant
implicit assumption in  hun that if he were to be spon-
taneous, others would see him as effeminate and "un-
mask" him. This insecurity spoiled his relationship
with people, especially in his profession as a physician,
and it had become his greatest concern. "I want to
be sure that this insecurity is based on illusory fears,
and that I am not a homosexual, or whether I have
reason to fear     .   .
                           ."

     The   following       is   the autobiographical information
                                                               1



                   MDA   ,   the   Drug of A nalysis       4