reason for consulting was a lack of spontaneity and
freedom of expression that he was aware of in face
of the persons about whom he cared most, especially
his mother. When I handed him photographs of his
mother he realized how she had manipulated him
through her suffering and that he had failed to stand
up for his real wishes and views. He Uved out with
intense feeling an imaginary encounter with her that
ended in stabbing "her" with a knife on the floor in
the midst of great anguish. He later wrote, *'I remem-
ber what difficulty I had in killing you, Mother. I
killed that Ufe of yours that was living for myself. I
could kill it so that I could then love you. I then gave
you my love, and it was not your own love back, but
that emanating      from myself."
  I  thought at this point that there would be nothing
else to deal with, since the patient's state was of con-
tagious peace and balance, and the main issues in his
life had been dealt with in the past five hours. Nev-
ertheless, I kept showing him photographs. Most of
them elicited inspired reflections, advice to his parents,
objective appraisals. Yet when I showed him one of
himself at one or two years of age he experienced dis-
gust, relived an episode when his mother was forcing
food into his mouth, and then felt that he was biting
a breast. "Even then        I   was aware," he conmiented
later, "that this   was   for   my
                             mother's lack of milk."
   After a few minutes of silence, the patient's pos-
ture began to change and gradually became that of a
fetus. TTiere were no words, just a sudden spasm that
he later explained as a reaction to an "imagmary"
blow.
   After three or four minutes more, he asked me to
leave him alone for some time, since there was some-
thing into which he felt that he could not go with a
witness. I was called in by him after five minutes or so,
and he explained his recent experience. He felt that
he had been present at the moment of the sexual act
out of which he was bom. He experienced his father
as a tough male, and his mother as frightened.
   I am impressed with the last events that I have re-
counted, regardless of their interpretation, because this
64               The Healing Journey
was a young man who not only did not know about
MDA   but who also had never been exposed to psy-
choanalytic or other expectations of prenatal memories.
Moreover, I know him as an exceptionally straight-
forward, honest person who sticks to what has mean-
ing for him in his words, so that I can hardly imagine
his weaving fantasies to put up an interesting show.
Whether these are memories, and there exists an /T'
independent of the structure of the nervous system that
can remember what he described, I do not know, nor
do I know anybody who does. Yet prenatal "mem-
ories" are a phenomenon of the human mind, observed
in the case of analysis or hypnosis, and an account of
MDA     would not be complete without the description
of this experience.
     The uniquenessof this patient's session does not end
here, thou^. After a short time, the patient emitted a
sudden cry and fell to the floor, raising his hands to
his chest. After the event, he explained, "This was a
death scene, and those stupid people had killed me."
But now, for the first time in the last hours, he began
to get restless, anxious, and uncomfortable. He ex-
pressed the feeling that he should not go any further,
but kept hesitating. "I feel that this does not belong
to me any more, and it is not for me to know. I
cannot bear the burden of another life." Yet, gradual-
ly, more scenes unfolded. He was a Nazi. He spoke
fluent German in a voice that I had never heard in
him before. He saw himself at a dinner table "Hilde,
bring mir die Suppe," he shouted. At another moment,
he sang while crossing a field in the countryside.
   Was all this a fantasy or a true recall of a previous
existence? The patient had a German grandfather, with
whom his family lived until he was four years old.
Could this Nazi that he was identifying with have been
his grandfather, or a transformation thereof in the
child's mind? He could not answer my question. All
that he knew was that he was feeling heavy. He felt
afraid and nauseated at his own question. "Was that
I? Myself? Was I that?" He felt burdened with guilt
for that Ufe as if it had actually been his. Finally, he
decided that he would not take such a responsibility.
                     MDA,      the   Drug of Analysis                 65