wants indirectly all my life, and the indirectness and
lack of consciousness are what have fouled me up."
   The process of increasing self-acceptance depicted
in this illustration came about by the therapist's re-
peated invitation that she take sides with her rejected
urges and acknowledge them as her own, rather than
as something happening to her.
  The following fragment of a retrospective account
by another patient illustrates in greater detail the
process of gradual unfolding of rejected urges in an
atmosphere of support:
              MMDA and the Eternal Now                   97
    ... As I felt the first effects I lay down on my
 bed. Dr. N. sat next to me and suggested that I
 relax and let myself be carried by whatever I
 might feel. I began to feel much anxiety and a
 great desire to cry. Dr. N. told me to do so if I
 wanted, but I was resisting. I told him that I
 would not permit myself to do that, for it seemed
 ugly to me; that I disliked persons who indulged       >^



 in self-pity and that I, who had chosen my way
 with so much struggle, felt that I had no right to
 feel   unhappy.
    Dr. N. said that perhaps I had good grounds to
 feel pity for myself, so to go ahead and not mind
 crying. He said: Take a holiday for an afternoon
 and do whatever you feel like. I asked whether he
 would approve, and as he said yes, I wept bitterly.
 Dr. N. then asked me how would my tears ex-
 plain their flowing if they could speak. I said they
 were flowing for the world's sorrow. He asked
 what that was. I said I imagined a great lake
 formed by the pain of every human being smce
 the world exists, from the smallest, such as that
 of a child that falls down and cries, to the great-
 est.   Aground of collective sorrow, in the fashion
 of Jung's collective unconscious. Dr. N. said he be-
  lieved that I might be weeping for my own ex-
  periences, for concrete and definite things. That
  perhaps I had lacked something as a child, for
  instance, and this fact was still affecting my life.
    I continued to weep and suffer, but with free-
  dom and   a feeling of relief. I had put a Vivaldi
  concerto on the record player. I felt the music
  very deeply and felt that through the music I
  could reach into the being who had produced it.
  I think Dr. N. asked me what the music was ex-
  pressing,  and I replied that this was Vivaldi's
  being, turned into a voice; a voice that expressed
  him totally. I marveled that he could have turned
  his inside out so completely.


As is usually the   case, once the patient contacts her
own urges before    they could be supported and could
98                    The Healing Journey
con- she is turned inside out, she can read the ex-
pression of another being.
   Such "turning inside out" in the last illustrations can
be understood as an achievement of greater directness
in the expression of wants. In both instances, it was
important to point out to the patients how they were
opposing their own ruges before they could be sup-
ported and could consider the possibility of letting go
of their opposition. Only when self-criticism is voiced
can it be looked at in the face and reconsidered. So,
questions such as "What's wrong with wanting more
and more?" or "What's wrong with crying?" had to
uncover the self-accusations of greed or self-pity before
the patient's mature judgment could evaluate such
automatic condemnation in a new light and make a
decision. The end result is that unconscious desires
become conscious and therefore a matter of intelligent
problem solving.
   Whereas the unconscious want is expressed in devi-
ous and symbolic ways, the satisfaction of which never
quenches the underlying thirst, a conscious want can
be fulfilled. Furthermore, the more conscious a wish
is, the more it is accepted and becomes in itself a

satisfaction.     Thus, unconscious sexuality     is   experienced
as isolation, loneliness, frustration, whereas conscious
and accepted sexuaUty is a pleasurable experience of
enhanced vitality. Unconscious rage may be experi-
enced as unpleasant irritation or guilt, whereas ac-
cepted rage may be welcomed as a powerful striving
for an end.
   The following serves as one more instance of the
bringing out of an unconscious desire and will show
a    way    of dealing with visual distortions. ^


        Dr. N. now looked to me like a hidden wolf,
     an animal that is used to hunt for its prey in
     caves. He invited me to address the monster (that
     I saw him as), to relate directly to it, forgetting
     it was he, that I knew him, that he wouldn't harm

    6   Exceptional with   MMDA   (5 per cent of subjects).
             MMDA and the Eternal Now                          99
  me, and so on.   I   spoke with   all   the courage I had:
  "Why are you so ugly?" "What do you care about
  my being ugly?" he answered. "That is my prob-
  lem, not yours." "But I wonder how you get
  along with that face. Who can love you like
  that?" And then I began to laugh as I thought
  that perhaps in his country everyone had a sinis-
  ter face and maybe he was regarded as handsome.
  I told him of this thought, and his face began to
  clear up until Dr. N.'s face emerged with no dis-
  tortion. He said that in his experience such dis-
  tortions indicated repressed anger, and even
  though he did not see this in me it would be
  profitable to explore the question of possible re-
  sentment. I said that I could not imagine any
  resentment toward him since I had such good
  feeling toward him; he had helped me so much
  and been so kind to me. As I finished saying
  this, I went on almost unconsciously, as if some-
  body were using my voice to say, "Why should I
  resent you except for not having loved me." I was
  surprised. Dr. N. commented that this was an ex-
  cellent reason for resentment. The experience
  ceased to be so burning and became more sweet,
  with that sad sweet sadness that remains after a
  good weep.

   The importance of this session lay in the fact that
not only could the patient's wish to be loved by the
therapist be expressed, but even this appeared to be a
substitute for the expression of her own loving. Some
days later, she was able to accept her feeling as a
richness rather than as a shortcoming, as she wrote a
poem that was the first after ten years of interruption
in her creative production.
   In the examples cited above, the patients were in
a conflict where a given urge (to love, to cry) was
opposed by a resistance, and the outcome was the
expression of the urge. This need not always be the
case, and one of the foremost contributions of Gestalt
therapy has been that of showing how the defense,
too, is an urge that can be redirected to more satis-
 1   00                   The Healing Journey
factory expressions than self-controlling and self-
squeezing. To this end, the patient is encouraged to
take sides with the voice of the super-ego ("top dog"),
and to experience this as his own judgment rather
than an external command by voluntarily "becoming"
it.




 WORKING THROUGH A PSYCHOSOMATIC SYMPTOM