As I mentioned earlier, the journey related in thi
foregoing paragraphs was insinuated on many occas
ions early in the session, but could not be completec
before she confronted her father, and as soon as shi
did this, she at once knew that she was ready to fol
low the tiger. Yet it took some insistence on the ther
apist's part to lead the patient to the point of findin
            —
her father the first personal image in an otherwis
anonymous array of dream characters.

      I   saw many       faces,   one   after another, faces of
  elderly, gray-haired gentlemen.               But none resem-
  bled    my   father.    I finally     set   out to rebuild my
  father's face, feature          by    feature. I first       saw   his
  hair and forehead, then his nose, the mouth, and
  finally the eyes and shape of the face. But still he
  had no ears. In spite of my efforts, I was not able
  to put them on. I finally decided that this was un-
  important.

  Then her    father came alive and smiled, and she coul<
see his   whole body. They embraced and kissed on th
          Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious                       151

mouth. The meeting took place in a tunnel which was
a place of communication between the living and the
dead. She told him she was in love and introduced
her fiance to him, with some fear. He approved, as he
was more affectionate than in real life. As he finally
withdrew toward the dark side of the tunnel, she wept.
   On two occasions during this patient's session, I sug-
gested an exploration into her phobia of streets by con-
fronting such scenes in fantasy. The following descrip-
tion (prior to the one just quoted) tells, in her own
words, of the first attempt to cross the main avenue in
Santiago at a familiar and threatening spot:

     I am standing on the Alameda at the corner of
  Victoria-Subercaseaux. All is gray as on a foggy
  day. I look toward the hill, and this is vaguely
  green, but I do not discern colors very well. I
  approach a       little   is there on the corner.
                            tree that
  It is as if I      wanted
                        protection. I reflect that I
                               its
  may support myself on it if I don't feel well, and
  I may thus avoid falling into the street. I get
  ready to cross the Alameda.                I   look   at the cars.
  There     is   much   traffic,    and the cars go faster and
  faster.   Suddenly, this          becomes a continuous row
  of cars that looks like a train going at high speed.
  There are faces in all the windows men, women,  —
  and children       —and     all    of   them look     in   my   direc-
  tion.   Then     this fades        away, and the           traffic   be-
  comes normal          again. I wait for the green light,
  and     I cross,                     Because I feel
                      feeling very afraid.
  afraid, I feel that I don't quite  touch the ground
  but float in the air.             A
                             man approaches. He is
  short and wears a brown overcoat and hat; his
  complexion is dark and he has a mustache.                             A
  typical Chilean face that can be seen in any street.
  He says, "Good afternoon." I answer his greeting.
  I vaguely sense that he is the man who assaulted
  me in the elevator, even though I don't remem-
  ber my assailant's face. I walk on toward Portugal
  Avenue, but with effort, trying to avoid the ten-
  dency to float. I stay close to the University walls
152              The Healing Journey
  so that they can hold me in case I fall. I look to-
  ward the palm trees and I see in the sky a pro-
  cession of bishops —  ^bishops in a line, all in cere-
  monial dress, miters, and robes of white and gold,
  all identical, with the face of Nehru.


  Here the first dream fades away. The second at-
tempt took place toward the end of the session, after
the vision of hell. As she attempts to cross the Alameda
at the same spot, a crocodile falls from the sky.


  It is a gray crocodile with a green design on its
  back, and I believe it is plastic, since real ones are
  not like this. I cross as far as the middle of the
  street. Then traffic becomes very thick so that a
  continuous line of cars passes at great speed on
  each side going in opposite directions. I panic to
  see myself running up the street together with the
  cars and at the same speed. I think. "What a
  crazy woman!" Only then do I realize that this
  crazy woman is myself. This cannot be, so I force
  myself back to the place where I was before I
  ran. The lights soon changed, traffic stops, and I
  walk with delicate calm to the other side of the
  Alameda. There I walk toward the University.
               —
  People pass ^ugly people, fat women, badly
  dressed—  and I feel that I have to look at all these
  faces, ugly as they may be. I relate these to the
  ones I saw in a previous dream. These were here
  for me to look straight at, without fear and per-
  haps without compassion. They were all ugly, un-
  pleasant. I have always sought after beauty, light,
  and harmony. But I realized that the beautiful and
  the ugly were different aspects of a whole: that I
  could not appreciate nor even know a part with-
  out looking at the whole. That is, beauty without
  ugliness loses its quality as such, its specific hue
  which makes it unique and distinct, beautiful.
  Again I looked at the faces of the persons cross-
  ing. There was a man with a scar on his face as
  if the flesh had been bitten out of his cheek or

  his face burnt with an acid. I felt that I had to
        Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious       153

    look at those faces as I had had to look at the
    ones in the previous dream.