friends or family members more significant. Such dis-
closure does not occur (as with ordinary hypnosis or
the effects of so-called "truth serums") as an act of
disinhibition and irresponsibility, but as a consequence
of an active interest in confronting and sharing the
xuth and a realization that much of the avoidance of
such in ordinary Ufe stems from unwarranted fear.
Aside from the above fact, the reaction to     MDA    is

jy far the most  verbal  compared   to other drugs men-
 ioned in this book, and this contributes to its being a
useful agent in the protentiation of group therapy. But
with that I shall not deal here.

NOTE OF CAUTION:
   The   years that followed the writing of this chapter
have shown that    MDA   is toxic to certain individuals

and at various dosage levels; also that, as in the case
of chloroform, what is a regular dose to many people
may be a fatal dose to some others: a case of aphasia
occurred in CMe, and a death occurred in California.
Since individual incompatibility is consistent and bound
to dose level, however, it is possible to ascertain it
through progressively increasing test doses (i.e., 10
 mg., 20 mg., 40 mg., 100 mg.). This should be done
without exception throughout the time preceding any
 firsttherapeutic MDA   session. Typical toxic symptoms
 are skin reactions, profuse sweating, and confusion; I
 have observed these in about 10 per cent of the sub-
 jects at dosages of 150-200 mg.
                                               CHAPTER   m
                                    MMDA AND
                             THE ETERNAL NOW



MMDA      IS   AN ABBREVIATION    for 3-methoxy-4,5-meth-
ylene dioxyphenyl isopropylamine. Like MDA, from
which it differs only in the presence of a methoxyl
group in the molecule, it is a synthetic compound de-
rived from one of the essential oils in nutmeg. The
chemical similarity between these two compounds finds
                                                  —
an echo in their psychological effects on man ^in each
case predominantly one of feeUng enhancement. Their
chemical difference is reflected in some quaUtative dif-
ferences in effect, however:      MMDA  frequently elicits
eidetic displays, and not the past but the present be-
comes the object of attention for the person under its
effect.
   MMDA        stands with   MDA   in    a category distinct
from that of LSD-25 and mescaline as well as from
that of harmaline and ibogaine. In contrast with the
transpersonal and unfamiliar domain of experience
characterizing the action of these two groups of drugs,
these feeling-enhancing isopropylamines lead into a do-
main that is both personal and famiUar, differing only
in its intensity from that of every day.




                                        MMDA SYNDROMES

One   possible reaction to   MMDA,      as to other psycho-
                             73
74                      The Healing Journey
active drags,       is a peak experience. How this experi-

ence   dijffers    from that brought about by other com-
pounds      will   become apparent   in the following pages.
An   alternative to the artil&cial paradise of   MMDA     is
its hell.   This  a reaction characterized by the inten-
                   is
sification of unpleasant feelings     —anxiety, guilt, de-
pression    —which may be regarded as a mirror image
of the first, and constitutes, too, a clear syndrome. Yet
these two types of reactions may be classed together
in tihat they are essentially feeling-enhancement states,
and contrasted to other states where the feelings are
unaffected, and there may be passivity, withdrawal,
and/or sleep rather than excitation. I find that both
imagery and psychosomatic symptoms are more prom-
inent in the absence of vivid emotions, so that I would
tentatively regard this syndrome as one of feeling sub-
stitution. Lastly, there are occasions when a person
reacts to    MMDA    with little or no productivity, both
feelings and their equivalents being absent, a state that
could well be regarded as the Umbo of           MMDA.    In
these cases, the effect of     MMDA is one of even greater
apathy or deeper sleep, so that I would suggest under-
standing them as instances where the repression of feel-
ings does not even allow their symbolic expression, a
state that can be maintained only at the expense of
consciousness.
   Broadly speaking, then, and for the purpose of de-
ciding how to proceed in the therapeutic situation, I
will consider the effects of    MMDA   as belonging to five
possible states or syndromes: one which is subjectively
very gratifying and may be regarded as a particular
kind of peak experience; another where habitual feel-
ings and conflicts are magnified; a third and fourth in
which feelings are not enhanced but physical symp-
toms or visual imagery are prominent; and, lastly, one
of lethargy or sleep. Psychosomatic symptoms or ei-
detic imagery may be present in any of these states,
but are most prominent in the third and fourth (as
feeling substitutes), while feelings are the most prom-
inent part of the experience in the first two, and a state
of indifference (possibly defensive in nature) sets in
in the third and fourth and culminates in the fifth. In
                MMDA and the Eternal Now                       75

the latter, as in normal dreaming, there         may be much
mental   activity,   but   thisbecomes difficult to grasp, re-
member, or    express.      These states may follow one an-
other in a given experience, so that the reaction to
MMDA      may be initially one of anxiety and conflict
until better balance is achieved or somnolence super-
venes; or a session may begin with the pleasurable bal-
anced state and then lead into one of emotional or
physical discomfort, and so on.




     ON THE ASSIMILATION OF PEAK EXPERIENCES

We have   elsewhere remarked how the peak experience
that may be possible under the effect of          MDA
                                                    is one

affirmation of the individual aspect of the self, in con-
trast to that of LSD, where the typical experience is
one of dissolution of individuality and the experience
of self as oneness with all being. In the peak experi-
ence that   MMDA    may elicit, it is possible to speak of
both individuality and dissolution, but these are blended
into a quite characteristic new totality. Dissolution is
here expressed in an openness to experience, a will-
ingness to hold no preference; individuality, on the
other hand, is implied in the absence of depersonaliza-
tion phenomena, and in the fact that the subject is
concerned with the everyday world of persons, objects,
and relationships.
  The    MMDA  peak experience is typically one in
which the moment that is being lived becomes intensely
gratifying in all    its   circumstantial reality, yet the   dom-
inant feeling   isnot one of euphoria but of calm and
serenity. It could be described as a joyful indifference,
or, as one subject has put it, "an impersonal sort of
compassion"; for love is embedded, as it were, in calm.
   Infrequent as this state may be for most persons,
it is definitely within the range of normal human ex-

perience. The perception of things and people is not
altered or even enhanced, usually, but negative reac-
tions that permeate our everyday Uves beyond our con-
76                     The Healing Journey
scious knowledge are held in abeyance and replaced
by unconditional acceptance. This is much like Nietz-
sche's      amor   fad, love of fate, love of one's particular
circumstances.        The immediate    reality   seems to be wel-
comed       in such   MMDA-induced       states without
                                                  pain or
attachment; joy does not seem to depend on the given
situation, but on existence itself, and in such a state of
mind everything is equally lovable.
   In spite of      MMDAbeing a synthetic compound, it
reminds us of Homer's nepenthe ("no suffering"),
wi'iich     Helen gives to Telemachus and his companions
so that they       may   forget their suffering: