The doctor asked me to answer her and tell her
  what she was doing to me, and how I felt. I an-
  swered just as she had screamed at me. He called
  my attention to that and asked that I try to an-
  swer her as Gail, looking for      my own    feelings
 214              The Healing Journey
   and expression.     I    was crying and looking for my
   own   voice, but   it   wasn't there. I couldn't find my-
   self. He asked me to have my mother take me
   and love me. She took me, but I hated her for
   not having done it before. I hated her so much at
   that moment. I wanted to do her harm and to show
   her how I felt. The doctor suggested that I hit
   her. I began to pound on a pillow, but I couldn't
   do it with much force, because I loved her, too.
   I felt guilty because she didn't let me love her. I
   realized that she had never taught me how to love.
   I realized, too, that it is not only important to
   be loved, but to be allowed to love back. The
   doctor then asked me to take her and love her.
   I took her and loved her and felt better. Still I
   felt sad. I asked him what to do with the guilt.
  He said, "Accept it." I still felt bad. I was 5one
  in that room. I felt bad, bad, bad inside. It
  seemed that there was a great empty black hole
  inside of me. I didn't tell him of this, because I
  felt it to be so bad. While I was sitting in the baby
  bed, I continually felt the light, which cast a sharp
  shaft from the window into the room and on the
  floor. The lidit was warm and filled me in my
  loneliness. I played with the light. It was God. I
  loved that light and the green plants that I saw
  outside the window. The day outside was brilliant
  and warm, and Mother so cold and bad-tempered.
  Once or twice in talking with Mother, I found my
  voice. It was sad, the voice of a little girl asking
  for love. The only thing that kept me from suf-
  fering was the light.


   Once more in this example we can see the peak
experience quality drawing closer in the measure in
which the patient is able to give in to her true feelings.
It is in sorrow ^nd the need for love that she finds
herself (her own voice) and the consolation of the
white light. The image of light as a beam, and the
religious feeling associated with it are too much like
other peak experiences with ibogaine to believe that
                     Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality           215

this isa real memory. Yet we cannot discard the pos-
sibilitythat the child's experience of light may be a
source of delight and support and constitute the orig-
inal experience at the root of the notion of God as
light-giver.
   In spite of the positive element in the quotation
above, it can be seen from it that the patient's situa-
tion was still not resolved. She was still torn by her
ambivalence, not being able to love wholeheartedly.
As in Jacob's case, though, these minutes of analysis
laid the ground for a synthesis in the following hour,
and their fruit was the most noticeable among the nu-
merous changes that she reported during the following
months. This may be appreciated in the following page
of a diary, written by her two weeks later:

                                if they ever had
       I used to ask other people
                       was ashamed of feelings. I
   feelings like I had. I
   used to ask Mother whether I was a freak!
   "Doesn't anybody love me?*' I said. Why don't
   they love     me?     I didn't love    myself either. Where
  was Gail? Gail is inside of Gail, but sleeping. She
  is just waking up, and it is time. I am a person. I

  am like anybody else. I have been living the lives
  of others. Afraid to try my own. My mother de^
  stroyed my life until this time. She never saw
  herself. Maybe that is why she could not see me.
  She lived the lives of others. Envy, greed, and
  guilt. She is tortured. I am tortured, but I can do
  something about it. I must exercise myself, I must
  live in the world and use my energies. Only at
  certain moments have I realized myself, and only
  through other people.          I   cannot help looking into
  and                              have my own good
           living the lives of others. I
  one. I think I     am freeing myself from my par-
  ents. I      am not my mother, thank God. I must
  respect the lives of others.           How
                                    can I take respon-
  sibility for others if I don't have any for myself?
      am                                 must be me from now
  I
  on   — me.     I   must be me.
           ^whatever I    may   be. I
                                     I
                                         have my own respon-
  sibility.
216                       The Healing Journey
      The   patient's feeling of completeness and relief had
its    sudden onset    in the session at a point where she
saw      herself climbing on the inside of a vertical tube.
This tube was her  own life, she knew, but was bot-
tomless, and where she was bom and downward there
was a black, inky, hazy substance which continued
downward without end. At the suggestion that she
fall down into the tube, she let go of the handles and
began to fall in the inky substance. As she fell, she
saw a spiral in motion, but principally, she says, "/
became myself in falling. The sensation was very
pleasurable and / began to like being me. I felt that
love was possible and that it was a way of living."^
   This process of becoming herself and discovering
love was the natural continuation of the contacting of
her own feelings and the finding of her own voice in
the earlier episode        —
                      ^her own reality buried under her
identification with mother. As before, becoming her-
self was achieved by means of falling. In the earlier
part of the session, it had been a falling into her
sorrow, her despair, by letting go of her defensive-
ness. Now it was a total letting go of effort, paralleled
and expressed in the image of falling. In the process
of the falling and spiraling, the image ceased to be a
purely visual one, so that her own body woke up and
took part in the event.