The above-cited accounts of        MDA
                                     therapy show both
the episodic hypernmesia that the substance can eUcit
and tile counteractive defenses that may set in, in the
face of unacceptable self-knowledge.
   In the interplay of remembering with anguish and
forgetting or becoming confused, perceiving one's life
and not daring to face it, lies„the specific hell or pur-
gatory of MDA, a counterpart of the better-known
hells of mescaline or harmaline. But the picture of the
effects of  MDA    would not be complete without a view
of its specific paradise.
   With many drugs, we find that there is a typical
field in which a peak experience is expressed, when it
does occur. This is, for instance, the domain of tran-
60               The Healing Journey
scendence and feelings of holiness for LSD, that of
beauty for mescaline, of power and freedom for harm-
aline, of loving serenity for MMDA. One may ask
whether there is anything that could be regarded as the
typical positive experience of MDA, and what this is
hke.
   In an overview of some thirty sessions with the drug,
I find that the most characteristic feature of those that
convey a sense of completeness, depth, and integration
is something that I would describe as an enhancement
of the experience of I-hood.
   In fact, just as the standard psychiatric term "de-
personalization" has been used in connection with the
state of mind often brought about by LSD-25 or mes-
caline, one could here use the converse term "person-
alization." Instead of the "egolessness" of ecstatic one-
ness with the world elicited by the former, there is
here an emphasis on individuaUty and on the unique-
ness of a given life. Indeed, some of the subjects have
at one point or other in their session come upon a
shared realization which they expressed emphatically
with an identical statement: "I am! I am! I am I!"
   This trait in "good" MDA     experiences appears am-
ply illustrated in the first case history presented in
this chapter. Let us consider once more the terms in
which the patient described his experience at the onset
of effects of the drug, as he enjoyed feeUng himself: "I
was strictly myself." "I was laughing at the man that
I was." "I went on feeling myself   —  ^it was me!"  This
experience resumed after some hours, while he was
beginning to remember his childhood events, and he
wrote in big letters, covering a complete sheet of pa-
per, "I AM    MYSELF."
   One aspect of this experience is that it entails the
sensing of the immediate reality. In contrast with the
person under the effect of LSD, who is prone to see
gods or devils, impersonal forces being manifested
Sirough his personal existence, here the individual's
consciousness is centered on the unique qualities of his
tactile, proprioceptive, auditory, and other sensations.
And these by no means show demons or abstract prin-
ciples, but the subject's particular reality. Records of
               MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis                 61

MDA sessions   abound   in such discovery of particulars,
which are often clues to unresolved past       situations.   A
patient, for instance, noticed that his voice       sounded
fearful and submissive, as when he talked with his
father, and this led him into a clarification of his past
relationship to his father, followed by a greater freedom
from such an anachronous pattern. He had probably
always talked with this same voice, only he was not
aware of this aspect of himself. Once he could sense
himself, he could also become aware of his attitude, his
past attitudes corresponding to the present one, and
Hfe episodes that brought them about. Thus it could
be said that his perception of himself at the moment
and his memory of himself in the past belong to the
same personal domain and are linked by easy associa-
tion chains. When one became the object of repression,
so did the other, and the lifting of repression of both
past and present went practically hand in hand.
  The child's discovery of his individuality probably
stems from the realization that he can control the
movements of his body and exercise a wiU. In analogy
with this, the adult rediscovering his I-sense in an
MDA    session often engages in some motor activity
which is the embodiment and sign of his individuality.
Moreover, on two occasions at least, such movements
constituted an enactment of the playful spontaneity of
a baby. In one of them, the patient started by engaging
in wormlike movements that he felt were like those of
a baby in a crib. Soon he started to make sucking
movements, which he continued for some three hours,
while other manifestations gradually set in. First, the
sucking sounds, then the repetition of the syllable
"ma," "ma, ma" again and again, then hitting the bed
rhythmically with his fists as he shouted "ma, ma'*
louder and louder, and finally the word "I, I, I" re-
peated with the rhythm of his beating, with pleasurable
forcefulness. Subsequently, and up to the time of the
session's end, the whole panorama of his family rela-
tionships gradually unfolded.
   Exactly converse was the sequence of events for an-
other patient, whose first experience worth noting after
MDA     had taken effect was the sense of egohood: "I
62                       The Healing Journey
moved an arm and became keenly aware that / was
moving it. / was there. What a wonderful thing, to be
myself! I could feel every muscle, every part of        my
being,   and   all   were        I."
   Shortly afterward, I showed him a photograph of
himself with his father. His father was leaning on his
shoulder in a gesture expressing both protectiveness and
possessiveness. As soon as he saw it, he talked to his
father in the photograph: "No, no       .  you are you,
                                           .   .


and I am me          No, no, no! I will not let you live
                     .   .   .



my life, I will not let you lean on me.            We
                                                are two
different worlds, and independent of each other. I have
been living your life, I have been carrying you inside
and doing what you would, but this will not go on/'
He explained this further to me, discovering that, even
in a love affair that he recently had, he could now see
that it had been his father and not himself who was
loving the girl.
     A similar process went on as he looked at other
photographs and evoked related memories. In face of
each, he was aware of what his own feelings and inter-
ests at the moment were and where lay the distortion
by which he was not being true to himself. Every time
he could sense this he experienced great discomfort,
until he relieved the situation, experiencing not what
had been but what would have been if he had been his
real self, talking to the figures of his past out of a
new stance that he now understood to be truly his own.
Thereafter, he was able to enjoy a sense of unity again
 and the feeling of his own "I." "Only I live this in-
stant, only I. I Uve an instant that is mine. Nobody
 has the right to live my life, and I am not to accept
 being burdened by extraneous life." "I don't want to
lose this precious moment. To feel myself in the world,
with others, is marvelous. Not the people, but oneself."
    At one point, his attention turned to his masturba-
 tion at the time of puberty and his guilt about it. This
 was his view of it now: "It was important only because
 / was there, and in it I found my I, my support. In-
 deed, it was the only thing that / did, and this behind
 my own back."
    This patient was a twenty-five-year-old man whose
               MDA, the Drug of Analysis               63