obtain firsthand experience in things; and its lack of
external pushes or pulls exploded me, paradoxically,
into the present probe into inner space, an activity
which I frequently experienced at the time as a trust-
ing yet risky leap into the unknown. The only aspect
of the book that I might now, several years later, be
tempted to change is a tendency to consider my "cures'*
too definitive. I would now prefer to consider them
important steps toward the goal of dissolution of com-
pulsive character or conditioned personality structure*

  The four pharmacological agents that I discuss in
   book fall mto two classes: feeling enchancers and
this
fantasy enchancers, both of which have in common
flie characteristic of being non-psychotomimetic psy-
chedelics. The two words "non-psychotomimetic" and
••psychedelic" evoke, beyond their specific denotations,
contrasting connotations. "Psychotomimetic" and "psy-
chedelic" have been the terms generally employed by
diJBferent individuals and in tiie context of characteris-
tic attitudes. "Psychotomimetics" (i.e., substances that
induce states that mimic psychosis) was a concept
arising from the hope, in the minds of medical and
scientific people, that psychosis might experimentally
induced and controlled in such a way that it could be
thoroughly understood and an answer found for its
healing.
  Since this possibility involved a danger, however,
the word soon took on the connotation of a warning,
a red signal, and, by extrapolation, a negative value.
"Psychotomimetic," therefore, came to be the "uptight"
word for "psychedelic." "Psychedelic" (deriving its
meaning from the Greek delos, "manifest," and thus
synonymous with "mind-manifesting"), the term in-
troduced in the Fifties by Dr. Humphrey Osmond, one
of the pioneering researchers into the new field, re-
tained the connotation of positive value. In contrast
to "psychotomimetic," which remains the language of
the professional, "psychedelic" became the language
               —
of the layman ^who was, at the time, more inclined
to see the positive aspect of the experiences elicited
by the new drugs. Throu^out this time, a controversy
xvi                    Foreword
simmered, bofled, and then almost evaporated without
solution: Are the drugs in question essentially "psy-
chotomimetic'* or essentially "psychedelic"?
   Fortunately, the Sixties saw tiie introduction of sub-
stances in which the psychedelic and psychotomimetic
properties are not coexistent. Because of the fact that
the four drugs with which I have dealt in this book
are non-psychotomimetic psychedelics (which is to
say, mind-expanding substances that do not elicit psy-
chotic manifestations, except in a metaphorical or
Pickwickian understanding of psychosis), tiiey offer a
very special interest to the clinician. They stand in a
domain of their own, which lies between that of sub-
stances that are not psychedelic enough (in the true
sense of the term) to be useful —   such as scopolamine,
                                —
amphetamine, or pentobarbital and that of substances
that are too psychotomimetic, difficult to handle, and
potentially hazardous.
   Due to the nature of the experiences brought about
by feeling enhancers and fantasy enhancers, the session
protocols from which I quote throughout the book are
not qualitatively different from (hose of my psycho-
therapeutic practice in general during the same period.
Their distinguishing characteristic, when contrasted
with the background of my general practice, is their
experiential density, the degree to which they are preg-
nant with significance. It might be said that the phar-
macological agents employed had acted as psychologi-
cal catalysts or lubricants, removing the obstacles, faci-
litating an attitude of openness to experience.
   I would like to point out, however, that the results
I have described are not independent of a personal in-
gredient and are not necessarily obtainable by anybody
employing the four drugs in psychotherapy. Intuition,
experience, and research data in the literature lead
me to accept the widely shared view tiiat psychothera-
peutic results are inseparable from a personal ingre-
dient. Furthermore, I am aware that it has been my
state, rather than my accumulated skills and informa-
tion, that has been the most determining influence in
the sessions I have conducted. One of the most im-
portant aspects of psychedelic drugs, whether or not
                        Foreword                       ^'^^^


                                         is that they open
they are potentiaHy psychotomimetic,
a person up to     subtle  mfluence—   which    may be a
blessing or a  curse.
   If the drugs described in this book
                                           come to be ac-
               medical  profession, I beUeve   they should
cepted by  the
                some  control that  will  ensure  that they
be subject  to
                                       experiential, and
are used by those with psychological,
technical qualifications, as has been proposed by
                                                     Pro-
fessor Joel Elkes at Johns Hopkins and also       by  the
staflE of the Maryland State Psychiatric
                                         Research   Cen-
ter m    their program for the trammg of astronauts of
inner space.
   Although they are not reported here, I did use con-
trols in    my research that contribute to the   substantia-
tion of     my description of the distmctive     qualitative
eflfects of the four drugs* I have reported the harmaline
research in a chapter on harmaline alkaloids pub-
lidied  m  Ethnopharmacological Search for Psychoactive
Drugs, edited by  Bo Holmstedt and published       m
                                                   1967
by the Department   of Health,  Education,  and Welfare
in Washington; more detailed information on            MDA
has also been published before, in Psychopharrruwology
5:103-107,      man article that appeared m 1971. I
have not published the data corresponding to the other
two substances, which lies at present in a storage room
in CMe      m
           a mountain of paper that fills several boxes.
I therefore apologize for saying no more at this point
than that I have given ibogaine and    MMDA to a suffi-
cient number of people to whom I have also given LSD
or mescaline or     MDAor harmaline to satisfy me about
the consistency of the reports. I can also add that 99
per cent of those who have experienced the effects of
dther ibogaine or harmaline have regarded &e effect
as so unmistakably distinct from that of feeling enhanc-
ers and ordinary psychedelics that they have regarded
such an experiential criterion as sufficient evidence of
an objective difference in the drugs' effects. I person-
ally share with Gordon Allport the view that psychol-
ogy will shift more and more from a one-sided sta-
tistical-mindedness to the detailed naturalistic study
of individuals.
   I believe that self-awareness is conta^ous, and
xviii                    Foreword
moments   of self-discovery, once adequately   communi-
cated, can be a gift of consciousness to others. Noth-
ing other than this has led to the current populariza-
tion of psychological literature. The true language of
psychology is not Latin, but plain romance, fi I have
not been mistaken in asserting that the experiences
recorded here are pregnant with significance, let them
then become part of our common awareness, and may
they contribute to the awakening of the individual
reader.
   A  final and brief word: my indebtedness to Frank
Barron, Leo Zeff, Stanislav Grof, Michael Hamer,
Carlos Castaneda, Don Juan, and the shamans of the
world.
   I hope and wish that this book may contribute to
the attainment of peace, joy, and harmony on earth.

                                    Claudio Naranjo

Kensington, California
March 1973
      THE
HEALING JOURNEY
                                                    CHAPTER     I




                                            THE HEALING
                                           POTENTIAL OF
                              AGONY AND ECSTASY


                                 DRUGS IN PSYCHOTHERAPY