Here we have a characteristic sample of the world
of ibogaine, both in its luminous and its dark sides:
the beam of white li^t and the cave with monsters, the
sun and the black pond with the hidden crocodile.
Furthermore, we see how the hellish and heavenly
scenes follow one another: after her initial outburst of
rage (which she describes as bemg like the eruption
of a volcano) comes an episode of light. Feeling full
of joy, she starts beating on the floor with her hands,
and Ae Negroes appear. She cannot sustain for long
the fear of the unknown and the primitive; the image
 fades, and while she prepares to rest, she sees the li^t
 coming flirough the belfry. Again, at the climax of this
204                      The Healing Journey
pleasant episode, she feels like moving about, standing
up—and darkness supervenes. This time, the process
does not stop by itself. She looks away; she cannot
resist it. The incompleteness of the process
                                                     probably
leads  her to another  daric scene,  as if  there were    some-
thing for her to assimilate in such darkness. Now the
worst part seems to be over, or she has become som&.
what desensitized to the fear through her repeated at-
tempts to stay with it. Now she can at least look at
the monsters and feel cahn in spite of her disgust
Movement is again what seems to impress her most
                                                         of the
 (as with the Negroes and the displacements
crocodile).* Visual confrontation          appears    to   have
                                     she    can  describe   the
reached its end by now,       since
monster in detail and bear     the  discomfort     TJe   aim  is

                                    the  "monster"     its  due
now for her to see and        give
place in herself, for it must be from her
                                                   own r^ty
                      proceeded.   Interestingly,    trembling
 that the image has
 means dancing to her.     Obviously,   the  act  of ttembtog
 or dancing meets     with   great  resistance   m    her. She
                     the  trembluig,   and   I  speak   of it as
 finally gives in to
                             the moment      she does   not ex-
 a "giving in" because    at
 perience herself  any more as purposefully doing it or
                                                urge. And
 enacting it, but as being moved by a real
 in the moment at whidi she    begins to tremble,  we wit-
                                                    to that
 ness the transition from Ae world    of monstere
 of light, which now origmates in   her  own  body.
                                                   session,
    The feelmg of rage at the beginning of the
                                           crocodile   with
 the primitive, sensuous drumming, the
                                       trembling   inonster
 electric-like movements, and the
               the same instinctual domain   that the pa-
 all point to
                                     cost of feeling com-
 tient has held in abeyance at tiie
 plete. It is no wonder that only
                                       now tjat she has
 stopped resisting can she also see how her
                                               httle     mmd
                       of her I AM.   Dancing-4he     spon-
 has been only a part
  taneity of movement             m
                            which basic        ag^ion   and
                                        has beenat
 sensuousness are united and reconciled—
                            wish and greatest taboo.
 tiie same time her deepest

      8   The                 images and the "electrical" fed-
                brilliant colors in the
 ings in her own body convey the same dynamic quahty as the
 imagery of movement.
             Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality            205
Dancing, too, is what would give her freedom. But
she has not danced, yet. She has only told herself to
do so, believing that it was I who suggested it (i.e.,
projecting her unacknowledged urge into the outside
world as an expectation). The unfinished situation
occurs more than once. About half an hour later, for
instance, I ask her to imitate the animal again, feel-
ing that she has not succeeded in doing so, and this
is how she describes the episode three days later:


     I am standing up. The doctor has asked me
  something. What was it? To dance? To tremble?
  To bring back the rhythm of the Negroes? Or that
  I imitate the cactus-animal? I don't know. Perhaps
  even then I didn't know. But I see myself stand-
  ing in front of a giant drum. Beyond the drum I
  see many Negroes moving to a rhythm. They
  have thick lips, painted white, and skirts formed
  of white strips that hang from a red belt. Their
  legs and chests are bare. I beat the drum force-
  fully with my right hand, and then with my left.
  I   have something   like   wooden hanmiers   in   my
  hands, and I beat with them. I stop drumming to
  carry the rhythm with my body. I want to dance.
  It does not come out right. I try again, and
  cannot. Then I see, among the Negroes, Maria's
  white, smiling face. Her expression changes as I
  look at her, and she laughs aloud. She mocks me
  because I cannot dance. I feel so angry that I
  throw the hammer and kill somebody, but I do
  not care. Something is interrupted. The doctor
  asks me to call the scene back to mind, but I find
  myself unable to do so. I sit down, and then I
  lie down. The doctor speaks, but I don't remem-
  ber what he says. I only know that I cannot
  understand, I cannot understand. Something is
  going on.
     Then I suddenly become aware of having been
  sexually aroused for a long time. I say this. The
  doctor tells me: "Give in to your desire. Feel it."
  And then I feel as if somebody took my legs and
206               The Healing Journey
  moved them in such a way that it became like a
  sexual act. There is no orgasm          —
                                      or thousands   ^it
                                                           —
  is difficult to explain. But nothing ends. Arousal
  continues. Again I see beautiful landscapes, sun-
  sets, vegetation, the sea, great expanses of desert,
  and the sun as a marvelous iBreball in the back-
  ground. I say, "How beautiful!" The doctor has
  asked me not to judge whether what I see is
  beautiful or ugly, but just describe it. But how
  can I not say it, if it is so beautiful? The sensa-
  tion of being, the sensation of coarse vibrations
  that beat  on and sink into my flesh. I feel like
  saying a thousand times, "I am I, I am I, I am."
  It is everything and too much.


  Once more we       see here the transition from the dark
underworld    of  mstinct   to the beauty of the earth at
large, the sun,  being.  But   there are differences between
these  episodes  and   the  previous   ones. She participates
more actively   this  time,  as  a  drummer, being practical-
ly one   with  the   crowd    of   dancing Negro_es, actually
beatmg (the floor) with her hands and, at l^st, want-
ing to dance rather than feeling under mstruction to
do so. And she feels murderous rage, too, though this
moment puts an end to the scene. Another difference
gives us a clue to understanding her rigidity
                                              and her
difficulty indancing in particular—her friend (Maria),
who laughs at her for not doing well. It is her pride
that will not unconditionally accept the
                                         spontaneity of
                                             pre-estab-
her movements. These must, according to
lished standards,   be    perfect, so that there is   no room
                                          of action, ani-
for improvisation, unpremeditated flow
                         she becomes  sexuaUy   aroused,
mal intuition. Lastly,
                            any more, but  an experience
and this is not a symbol
                herself to have and express through
                                                      her
that she allows
own body.                             ^       .   j    •
                                                               ^i.^
                     note that the unagery durmg toe
   It is interesting to
                                            otherworldly
phase of resolution and integration is not
           but rather like a synthesis  of the dark wet
any more,
plant and animal world with the
                                    world of pure hgh^
                                   is the ordinary world
sky, and extension. Such synthesis
                Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality             207
—though      seen with no ordinary eyes. I      am   reminded
of Blake's

           God appears, and God is Light,
           To those poor souls who dwell in Night;
           But does a Human Form display
           To those who dwell in realms of Day,