say?"-—"Go away-"—"What does he feel?" He could
not ima^ne that. "Maybe perplexity," he suggested.
This was an appropriate moment to take another step
in the same direction, that is, to unfold and bring into
the spheres of feeling and action the meaning that is
packed in the fantasy. "Be your fatiier, now," I said.
 ^Become him to the best of your dramatic ability and
hear what she has said to you." He now found him-
self able to impersonate his father and felt, not per-
plexity, but great sorrow, suffering, and anger in the
face of rejection. He wrote down on the following day:
 *I see my motiier as hard, with no affection and afraid,
and I no longer regard my father as that insensitive
being who hurts her with his love affairs, but as some-
body who wants to open the gate of her love without
succeeding. Yet I feel compassion toward my mother."
    There followed a fantasy of being licked by a lion,
and then a lioness bit his genitals off, leaving him as
a lifeless doll. At this point, he left the couch, walked
around, went into the garden, where everything looked
to him "as if it existed for tiie first time." He went
back to the room, put Stravinsky's The Rite of Spring
on the record player, and with tiie very first notes felt
drawn to move, specifically his hands.
    This is how he later describes the experience: "I
gradually surrendered to the rhythm so that I soon
found myself dancing like someone possessed. I felt
balanced, expressive, and above all, myself. At one
point, I saw myself in the mirror and noticed a con-
ventional movement of the hands which did not stem
from the music. I rejected it at once. When one side
of the record was over, I turned it over and went on
 1   76             The Healing Journey
dancing. I felt no fatigue, and movement gave me great
pleasure."
   After the dancing, I proposed that we work on a
dream, which    I shall not describe, though it was im-
 portant in giving him a greater sense of his own worth.
Following the dream, he looked at family photographs
that he had brought along with him and which helped
to clarify more of his relationship to his father and
mother. Four hours after the initial symptoms occurred,
he felt that much of the eflfect of the ibogaine had worn
off. He talked to some friends who came over. "Some
faces I saw as very beautiful and expressive," he re-
ported later. "Others I saw as distant, fearful, and
these did not show their beauty, but hid it behind the
fear." This perceptiveness of tide masks people wear,
as he puts it, went on through the next day.
   After the session, the subject felt that the experience
had been valuable to him in several ways. After a
month, he pointed out different aspects of his life in
which he sensed improvement To one of these he re-
fers in the following terms:


          Afineness of perception, a revelation of the
     true or genuine—  a knowledge that there are false
     and incomplete things in the world, human atti-
     tudes that are not whole, experiences that are
     watered down, works that are half-works. I now
     feel the need to go beyond this. And I acknow-
     ledge aggression as a means of going beyond.

   This may be the place to mention that, in spite of
the subject's wish to imdergo the experience, he could
have been described as a contented, easygoing, passive
viscerotonic, but now presents himself as more striving,
active,  and firm.
     Another benefit of the session he reports   is   a   clari-
fication of his family relationships.  He now felt that
he could see his parents as they really are; he became
aware of how "castrating" the relationship with his
mother had been.
  As a third gain from the experience, he cites the
knowledge or awareness of the body as a means of
                 Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality         1 77

              it became apparent to him in the danc-
 expression, as
ing. "Itwas important for me to know," he says, "that
there are movements of mine that are not mine but
borrowed, used in view of ends, but not emanating
from an inner being." This awareness of a distinction
between that which stems from his "inner being" and
that which is not really his seems to be the same as
that of the difference between what is genuine or not
in other domains, and which is the source of his new
longmg for greater depth in experience, action, and re-
lationships. It is also related to what he regards as an-
other area of progress, which is an enduring awareness
of "masks"   — ^*'an awareness of how faces are manip-

ulated, and how behind the masks there is fear."
     Finally, the subject has discovered both a lack in
his experience of the religious   and the fact that what
he   uscii to regard as his religious   problems were only
imaginary.
   To this it must be added that the subject had been
a devout and rather proselytizing Catholic, raised in a
religious school, and a member of several religious
organizations. To persons who knew him well, and to
myself, much of his religiosity seemed conventional, and
some problems which he labeled "religious" involved
the decision of accepting or rejecting a dogmatic reli-
gious authority, It is noteworthy that his insight into
tiie distinction between such concepts of religion and
religious experience proper was not brought about by
the discussion of his life and problems, but spontane-
ously elicited while looking at the photographs in the
Family of Man collection, where he found one of a
Buddhist monk praying witii true devotion and another
of a man kneeling out of idolatrous respect for the
religious authority.
   ITie session that I have briefly recounted shows a
variety of situations which have been sources of in-
sight and therapeutic benefit: relaxing, dancing, look-
ing at objects and people, looking at photographs,
acting out fantasies, working on a dream, a guided
reverie. All these are possible domains for self-unfold-
ing and discovery or for more elaborate psychothera-
peutic procedures. In the case of this particular person,
                                                           —
1 78               The Healing Journey
we  find that it is of his contact with the external world
that we can more appropriately speak in terms of self-
mifolding, 5d/-expression, ^e//-discovery. In fact, his
 basic experience was, in dancing, that of his own style
 and his own movements; looking at external objects
or persons led him to a discovery of the truth of thmgs
 by means of the use of his own eyes, whose function-
ing he had, in a way, been holding in abeyance. The
fantasy, however, had a different experiential quality.
 The sexual scene where his mother rejects his father,
 or that of the castrating lioness, or the dream sequence,
which I have omitted for the sake of brevity, express
his psychopathology rather than his sanity and his frag-
mented personality rather than his "self/' Whereas
life may be the best psychotherapist in the moments
when it is flowing at its natural, undistorted rh3rthm,
this is not the case in those moments when the person's
sub-selves are in conflict. It is here that the psycho-
therapist finds his proper element. Here, his function
like tiiat of the Eskimo shaman     — ^is that of finding lost


souls. Accordingly, it is with the darker sides of the
ibogayie experiences that most of this chapter will deal.
    Yet before moving mto that domain, we must con-
sider the most typical form of the ibogaine peak ex-
perience, which is precisely the kind that the subject
in the illustration above did not display. Whereas in
his case —  ^probably due to his being an extrovert       — ^it


was his contact with the external world that was per-
meated with peak-experience characteristics, for others
it is the symbolic medium of imagery that reflects such