^Father."        The   patient     now   realized   how   isolated his
1 94               The Healing Journey
parents are from each other and how ri^d they are.
"This is not how I saw them in the LSD experience,"
he remarked. "They ahnost don't look human, but like
statues/'
     "Maybe you do see them as monuments," I said
     "In themoment that I hear that," he wrote later,
"I   am   filledwith the characteristic glow of clarity. I
have reached the bottom.      I see to what extent I am
still   building monuments or funeral edifices to my
parents."
     Wereturned to the dialogue.
  Mother said, "Why have you been so mean to me?
Can't you give me some love?" Father answered, "I
cannot love because I feel excluded from your world,
your friends."
     And now  the subject had another insight. He rea-
lized that thiswas himself speaking to his lover. Stimu-
lated to ima^e her as present and to talk to her out
of this feeling, he said, "You are a whore and a
stranger. I don't want to love you, because you ^ve
yourself to anyone."
   When I suggested that he was still speaking of her
rather than to her, he realized that he was unable to
do so. "She is going to eat me," he said, and as he did
so, he imagined that he had dreamed of many little
animals, because the real ones were beyond his visual
field. These were huge monsters which ate children up,
especially lonely children.
   "According to this," he commented, "every woman
who is different from one's mother (who is a *heaven-
ly being') must be a monster it would be better not
to get too close to, since she can eat the *boy.' I don't
know how I escaped being impotent or homosexual."
   Presumably, these insights became important when
the patient turned back to the experiencing of his
dream. The feeling was that there had been something
incomplete in the previous contemplation of it.
   Here is the new sequence, in the patient's own
words:

     Things occurred as before in the first part: the
  threads, the greenish creatures, the rat, the bird,
            Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality                1 95

the washing of Jacob's body, and the washing of
my   mother's face with closed eyes     m the milky
stream. I am aware that this is a sexual act. I go
on washing her face and stay with her until she
rises into &e heigjits. I now turn to the man in
the shadows, who sits domineering and menacing
on his throne. I fly toward him to see what he
will to do me, since I realize that this man is not
myself. As I approach that shadowy height, I see
that the man puffs out his cheeks and contorts his
face as if to frighten me away, moving his arms
like a big gorilla. And then I suddenly realize that
fliese  are the contortions of old, toothless
Father. And suddenly, too, as I approach further,
I see that there is no longer any flesh on that face,
but only bone.
   I fly closer and closer and finally reach the
great monument. I fly through one of the eye
sockets (the whole proves to be an artificial con-
crete structure) and come out on the other side.
Looking back, I see that the great monument is
nothing but a facade, ruined on the inside. Now
the ruins disappear, and only die seat remains. I
understand that this is the place that Dad left, and
I take it. I am not the owner of the world, but I
have taken my fatiher's place. And I realize that
to be a father is to own the world.    A
                                      great wave
of laughter and crying invades me. I laugh and
cry for a long tune. I was free from a great rest-
lessness. I felt beatific. I later   wondered: What
place can   my father leave me? Is there anything
which I have admired in him? And I recalled that
he was an authority on making fur coats. He was
a master in his craft, and I had always respected
him for that. I felt relieved and thought that I
would pursue a similar p^ection as a sculptor,
and that sculpture itself was, at another level, like
an inheritance from my father.
  I could open my eyes now and rise from the
bed. I have my place. I cannot be excluded by
anybody, anywhere. I can conquer      my    fears, I   can
go through them.
1 96                    The Healing Journey
       I   have   my    place.
          not even necessary to go or come, forget
       It is
  or close gjiettos. I have my place within, with^
  with whomever it may be.
    I do not need to ask for anything because I
  have my place. I don't need to go or come, flee,
  escape, since I have my place.
     Eveiything is part of ME. I AM. It is not fliat
  I must sculpt. I will do my work, whatever I care
  for, wherever, since, it being part of me, I am not
  bound to it in a symbiosis. Neither      nor    will X        Y
  pull me toward them, since I am where I really
  am.
    There         is   no need      to escape from anjrthing,
  pleasant, unpleasant, hateful or terrible, whatever
  it is, since it is always possible to go beyond, into
                              —
  the most definitive ^that is, within.
       I enjoy feeling        how   it   resounds in me: I have
  my       place, I    have   my   place, /     have   my    place.


The    therapeutic benefit of the session              is   clear   enou^
from the patient's words.           I    can only add that      this state
of mind persisted.
  We    can recognize in this session several elements
mentioned earlier in this chapter as frequent traits of
ibogaine experiences, and here they show their place
in the therapeutic process: the animals (the devouring
monsters or the gorilla-like father), symbolizing the
instinctive forces, sexual hnagery     ("washing^ the
mother), the fli^t toward the li^t (the bkd approach-
mg the white ligjit of the sun and the ascent of the
mother to a luminous area), feelings of resentment,
loneliness, exclusion ("I feel excluded from your
world"; '"You are a whore and a stranger"), and, par-
ticularly, tiie Oedipal situation           m
                                  which tiie sexual and
aggressive urges    are embedded.
  If   we compare    the patient's first dream, resulting in
a feeling of incompleteness, witii the second sequence,
which ended        m
                   tiie tears of "arrival," we see that the
first is tiie blueprint, the second the real
                                                building, a
two-dimensional event as compared         to a three-dimen-
                  Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality          197