almost undisturbed carry-over of that state of mind
first made known to him with the help of the chemical.
On the fifth day, he felt depressed for a few hours,
but recovered after writing in his diary. This writing
dealt first with his depression and then with what he
had felt when "I was at that center, the center of
myself, and I knew that I would never lose this, for
I needed only to breathe deeply, smile at the universe,
and remember the bookshelves that I looked at that
day," He continues: "I understood that a few seconds
and an empty room are enough to justify a whole life.
It does not matter any longer, then, to die or to lose
an arm. It is not a matter of quantity. In zero minutes
and with no things, life is as good as possible. In a
minimal space and with no money, even without health,
with no social success and all that shit." And he adds:
"But I feel this even today. I am at some distance
from the central point of the Aleph, but I continue to
be at the center, my center that is still chaotic, but
yet everywhere, and pure."
  I think that the patient is   being very accurate   when
he perceives that in spite of his being "centered" in
the newly discovered domain of intimate joy, self-
sufllciency, and indifference to frustration, he is never-
theless in a state of disorder. In other words, he does
not confuse (as patients and even therapists sometimes
do) the experience of transcendence with that of psy-
chological balance and sanity. He is aware of negative
emotions that he recognizes as part of his neurosis and
he continues to react in ways that he knows are not
the most desirable; but in the same way that "losing
an arm" would not matter, he no longer tortures him-
self for such shortcomings. Instead, he experiences a
less   compulsive but perhaps more effective wish to
"construct" and "make order" in his life, "like a duty
of love, or holy labor."
   As different as spiritual detachment and healthy psy-
chological functioning may be, I believe that the latter
may gradually develop in the presence of the former,
making the therapeutic implication of such a peak ex-
perience an indirect one.
   One of the ways in which a mood of serenity may
80                  The Healing Journey
result in further change is that it increases the possi-
bility of insight, much as an analgesic can permit
surgical exploration of a wound. Such insight cannot
be possible insofar as the patient's sense of identity
depends entirely on the integrity of an arbitrary ideal-
ized image of himself. But when our subject now says
that "death would not matter," even though he is most
probably exaggerating, he may be unknowingly stating
a metaphysical truth; for "at the center" death of the
self-concept does not matter.
  How a "not-caring" mood and attitude can lead to
greater awareness may be illustrated by other passages
of the same diary. The following was written three
days after the sesion:

         Something could not come out of               my   throat.
     Anal masturbation: the          great guilt, the   supreme
     offense, that the   Great Puritan does not forgive.
     The utmost degeneration, the worst garbage.
       It was necessary to discuss it with Dr. N., but it
     did not come out    .  the fact of having caressed
                             .   .


     my anus, having introduced objects into it while I
     masturbated with the other hand, having day-
     dreamed of being penetrated ... the great               hole,
     the ass, the center of my hell      remained hid-
                                           .   .   .



     den, not deeming itself forgivable or understand-
     able, seeing itself as something at which even a
     person like Dr. N. would feel disgust.
         I can shove that Great Inquisitor into my ass,
     shit or piss on him     —
                            ^but all this is already giving
     it too much importance, the solution lies in under-

     standing clearly and feeling that it does not matter
     too much, that it is, like the rest of the problems,
     a surmountable thing. And not something evil or
     horrible, or a sign of inferiority, but a transitory
     way out for a torrent that is transitorily stopped.

  And he      adds, three days later:

        I have understood that the great guilt does not
  lie    in anal masturbation but in being homosexual;
                MMDA and the Eternal Now                     81

  and I feel dizzy at the thought of it, because it
  seems to me that this is the worst that could
  possibly happen to me.

   The sequence of psychological events described
above portrays a familiar process in psychotherapy,
whereby an object or concern (i.e., ways of mastur-
bating) loses importance, while increased importance
is attached to a more substantial issue   (e.g., being
homosexual). A detached, serenely accepting attitude
is truly the power that makes the change possible, and
petty conflicts     may   eventually lead to greater conflicts
that enrich life rather than detract from it.
   Here are further illustrations of the patient's           in-
creased ability to see himself:

     I felt that     nothing mattered. I thought about
  many     things in the following days. I understood
  that my preoccupation about wearing comfortable
  clothes, clothes to my taste (I felt some shame
  when I retorted with this as the first answer to Dr.
  N.'s question as to       what   I   wanted to do) stems
  from     my   mother's imposition on         me to wear
  clothes which I found humiliating. I understood
  why     I don't   do things   that I like or that I find
  convenient: because I consider them an obliga-
  tion, and my mother has been telling me of my
  obligations for twenty-eight years. And I suspect
  that not wanting to phone my girlfriends when she
  or my father are around indicates guUt feelings
                —
  about sex and I also feel guilty about giving
  other women the love that I don't give her,

   I do not believe it is just a coincidence that the
passage telling of his insist into three different situa-
tions begins with a statement of the feeling that "noth-
ing matters." For insight, we well know, does not
depend on thought processes alone, but is one of the
facets of change. Only when "nothing matters" could
he accept being the "bad boy" that he never was and
conceive thoughts in which he opposes his mother, for
82                   The Healing Journey
such    thoughts    are     mseparable from his         own   self-
assertion    and   rebellion.
     The behavioral equivalent to the openness to in-
sight described above is an openness to feelings and
impulses which would be incompatible with the ac-
ceptable self-image. These become bearable now be-
cause there is something other than an image to rest
       —
upon a "center," which gives the patient confidence
to let go of his habitual patterns. If death does not
matter, why would getting angry matter, or not doing
the "right" thing according to previous conditioning?
   The following passage is a good illustration of such
increased spontaneity in behavior and constitutes a
very exact parallel to the understanding expressed in
the previous quotation:

       Once more     I   have     felt rotten for living in this
     house where     life   is   impossible, with such heat,
     with the old quack and his clients who keep ring-
     ing the doorbell, and the old woman nagging,
     nagging, nagging. Why don't I go with my car
      and get those chairs, and why don't I go and get
      the other crazy woman at the clinic on Saturday,
     and what would Uncle John say if he knew that
     I am not going to do this or that errand for her.
     (And how full of ants the house is, millions of
     them, and they fly! And they don't let me write.)
     But I told them: Fuck Uncle John and all the
     relative* and what they say! I shouted at her and
     pounded on the table once, twice, three, four
     times. And I told her not to expect me to go on
     listening to her just because this was what I had
     done for twenty-eight years, and so on. And she
     left with a bag. I thought that she was going to
     her sister's house, but she has come back, so that
     it seems that she just went over to the laundry