hancement of those   aesthetic, religious, and mythical
overtones in everyday reality, and a heightening of
inspiration which carries for him a sense of intrinsic
satisfaction.
  Only toward the end of the session, in the last se^
quence quoted, do we see conflict, and we may sense
a personal reality behind the veil of the symbolic mur-
der scene. The fact that this was the last fantasy epi-
sode in the session suggests that more personal and
psychopathological material might have followed but
was repressed, and this we cannot know. I do know
from other instances, thou^, that a peak experience
does not necessarily imply the transcendence of chronic
personal conflicts. It may merely indicate that these
are not aroused by the real or imaginary situation which
is the subject's focus of attention.
   I think that it may be useful in this connection to
consider a peak experience in terms of its completeness,
and not just its quality. Just as I have spoken of arche-
typal visual experiences which are incomplete in that
the subject does not feel involved in the symbolic ac-
tion, so there are others where the motor element may
predominate, with slight ideational concomitants, or-
                                                —
with other drugs more than with ibogaine ^feelings
may be dissociated from either action or understand-
ing. In the present instance, I think that the incomplete-
ness of the session is to be seen in the domain of re-
lating. Just as the extroverted patient of our previous
illustration experienced moments of fulfillment in con-
tact with others (even photographs of others) and ob-
jects, the introverted subject in this session expressed
himself best in imagery and movement not in the per-
ception of the external world or hi contact. Even in
his imagery tiiere is a predominance of elements, ob-
jects, and animals over human beings. When other per-
sons appear (omitted from the quotation), they are
vague, unknown, semi-mythical and practically unre-
lated to him in the plot of his fantasy, except at the
very end, in the stabbing of the mummy with the dag-
ger. Aside from the anger and subsequent feeling of
dirtiness in this scene, interpersonal feelings are absent
from   his session,   whereas in a complete peak experi-
                                                       —
1 86             The Healino Journey
ence I would expect feelings of love as weU as those
of beauty and holiness.
   At the time of this session, I was still too unfamiliar
with the use of ibogaine to take the initiative in pre-
senting to the patient the challenge of relationship,
bringing out the (presumably) avoided issues and his
psychopathology. This is what I have since done in my
practice, however, and I think that the exploration of
conflict can not only lead to more enduring change
but in no way detracts from the contribution of a peak
experience.
   The following instance shows how a state of sub-
jective enjoyment and relative integration may be in-
terrupted by a shift in attention toward a conflicting
issue, as the patient confronts painful emotions, only
to be resumed with greater fullness after a problem
has been successfully lived out.
   This illustration is from the account of a twenty-
three-year-old woman of a seemingly mild, subdued,
and dependent character, who consulted parfly in com-
pliance with her husband's wishes, and also in the hope
of achieving a more fluent expression of her feelings
and thoughts. Her diflficulty in communicating had be-
come apparent to her as a source of unhappiness in
her marriage, and I could assume from interviews with
her husband that her life with him must have been a
source of intense frustration. She did not say so during
the two appointments prior to the session with iboga
not out of a lack of sincerity, it seemed to me, but a
lack of awareness of her feelings.
   In approxhnately the thh-d hour of the patienf s ses-
sion, she entered a pleasurable state of absorption in
a world of imagery:

        was snowing. This was no ordinary snowfall.
       It
   The snowflakes were larger, and one could see
   their component particles. These were very fine
   fibers with irregular edges, covered with mnumer-
   able little diamonds. The snowflakes danced and
   played. In the midst of this snow-feast I saw my-
   self as a beautiful young woman, naked, with very
   white skin and long blond hair. I danced along
                                                        —
              Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality           1 87

  with the snowflakes in what seemed a contest of
  agility. I ran after them laughing, trying to catch
  them, and when I did, I pressed them against my
  face. Everything was bathed in a golden ligjit. It
  conveyed a feeling of freedom, beauty, and joy,
  A  great peace enveloped me.

   This may be enough as a Ktmple of a peak experi-
ence being lived in the symbolic domain of visual
imagery. The dominant feeling and impulse content
(as is frequently the case in ibogaine peak experiences)
is conveyed by the images of dance and light. It be^
came clear to the patient that the woman dancing was
herself, and she enjoyed feeling so full of life, beauti-
ful, and free. Then she felt the urge to dance herself,
ratiier than merely watching ment^ pictures, but, sig-
nificantly, this she was not able to do. She felt weak
and nauseated and went back to lying down.
   From my experience of tiie drug, I have the impres-
sion that its effect is closely linked with the domain
of action and, particularly, physical movement. Much of
the imagery may suggest this (dancing, beating
of drums), but the experiences tiiat have impressed me
as most fulfilling and complete have involved actual
participation of tiie body. (It is worthy of note that the
iboga root is eaten by dancers in Gabon.)
   The purely visual quality of the experience described
above, plus die sudden malaise that she felt when at-
tempting to enact with her physical self the dance that
she was enjoying in her imagination, suggest to me
what could be an "encapsulated" peak experience
one that cannot be brou^t to bear in more than one
field of experience, and which can be sustained only
at the expense of avoiding certain feelings, issues, or
areas of awareness. This is not to say that such an ex-
perience is of no value; on the contrary, such avoid-
ances may be used as a strategy in the elicitation of
peak experiences in meditation techniques, where im-
mobility and even the stiUness of thinking are sought.
But once the higher feelings or understandings have
been achieved, the issue becomes that of bringing them
down to earth, translating them into the terms of ac-
1 88               The Healing Journey
tion             —
     and living and a cracial step in this process seems
to me to be the simple awareness and functioning of
the body. In several instances of ibogaine therapy, I
have seen the transition into a higher state of integra-
tion accompanied by a "remembering" of the body and
its sensations after a period of absorption in fantasy,
or by a sudden opening up of the channels of move-
ment. The present case was no exception. Suspectmg
that the incompleteness of the patient's experience was
related to her holding back her feelings for her hus-
band, I suggested working on a dream into which we                       ^




had looked the previous day. Here is the patient's ac-
count of this episode:

     While I danced with a handsome and virile
   man, I saw my husband turned into a weak, fai
   man   with    han^gred cheeks, laughing in a fem-
  inine way. I  went beyond the original dream and
  described how, seeing this horrible change, I
  turned away and walked with my partner into the
  next room. We danced, and later he took me
  home. We said goodbye at the door. As I walked
  into the living room, I met my husband, who still
   looked as     u^y   as before.   At   first   I locked myself
  up   in   room, but die doctor instructed me to
            my
  face him, and I told him how ugly and weak I
  found him.
    I suddenly found myself beating up a cushion
  that represented Peter.      My    hand        flew!   With what   i