can be carried over into the contemplation of
events. Needless to say, none of the patients cited
this chapter has fully attained such a goal.
   I want to end this chapter by pointing out thai
useful as pure harmaline can be in psychotherapy, th
therapist employing the drug should always keep i
mind the fact that some individuals are rattier unsus
ceptible to its psychological effects. As was mentione
earlier, some of them may have no more than a phy
sical reaction to the drug, an unpleasant state
malaise, somnolence, and vomiting that is most prob
ably the result of a conversion reaction.
         Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious      167
   Early in our work with harmaline, we formed the
 mpression that these "untoward reactions" (consist-
 ng of a lack of psychological effects and the presence
of physical distress) were most likely to occur in indi-
viduals who feel comparatively ill-at-ease in their ani-
mal level of existence, which it is the drug's virtue to
lay bare. If it were true that a poor or unpleasant
reaction was the consequence of a desperate though
unconscious attempt to inhibit that which harmaline
stimulates, it would be conceivable that this might be
obviated by another drug.
   First I thought of mescaline, both in view of the
condition of self-acceptance which it can bring about
and the fact that one of the admixtures in the native
Amazonian ayahuasca drink has been proved to con-
tain DMT. 4 Small doses of mescaline indeed proved
to increase productivity and diminish the unpleasant-
ness that the experience has for some subjects. Yet
mescaline has effects of its own, which may not be
desirable in a given case. MDA, on the other hand,
proved to have the properties of an ideal admixture.
The feeling-enhancing quality of     MDA    facilitates the
decoding of visual imagery into direct experience; its
amphetamine-like quality serves to counteract the
somnolence induced by pure harmahne, and its stimu-
lation of the drive toward interpersonal contact and
communication opposes the tendency to withdraw that
leads some subjects into a dreamlike state, the content
of which they cannot recapture.
   The effects of the drug combination seem to be
more than a summation of their properties in isolation,
however. In the first place, the duration of the harma-
line-MDA experience is much longer, averaging twelve
hours. Qualitatively, there can be differences that I
will not go into, since their chnical importance is slight.
Yet there is one particular type of reaction which,
uncommon as it is, deserves special mention, both as
a warnin g and a reassurance. This is a state of con-

  ^F.   A.Hochstein and A. M. Paradies, "Alkaloids of
         Caapi and Prestonia Amazonicum," Journal of the
Janisteria
American Chemical Society 79: 5735 (1957). DMT: N,N-
iimethyl tryptamine.
1 68            The Healing Journey
fusion and great excitement in which a person may
talk to dream companions and thrash around      —   even
risking getting bruised against the walls or furniture.
It would seem that the aggression that usually emerges
in harmaline experiences in the symbolic guise of ani-
mals or other fantasies is here released in a physical
way, though still in a fantasy world of delirium. I have
seen this occur twice (in about thirty sessions), the
reaction being followed in both instances by amnesia.
Alarming as these sessions were at the time, however,
they proved to be extremely beneficial to the patients
for reasons which can only be a matter of speculation.
   In one instance, the patient was a shy and inhibited
young woman who, early in her session, started scream-
ing at her absent mother all that she had withheld from
expressing and from feeling toward her. Soon her
speech became confused, and interaction with her was
almost impossible. She kept playing the parts of some
dialogue, which was increasingly hard to follow because
of her mumbling. Still, it was obvious that the direct,
energetic person that she became at that moment was
the opposite of her shy and depressed ordinary self.
When she recovered, she was somewhat bruised from
rolling on the floor, but her voice and style of move-
ment had changed, retaining some of the assertiveness
that she lacked in life, but had displayed in her in-
toxicated state. Not only was this change enduring, but
it carried over into her feelings and decisions. In this

particular case, the patient had experienced moments
of exceptional freedom under the effects of LSD in a
non-therapeutic setting, and this freedom had not car-
ried over into her life. On this occasion, though, when
she did not even remember what she had felt and said,
her temporary loss of control proved to be a life-
changing catharsis.
   The other case was similar in essence: that of a
frigid woman with mildly compulsive character style,
who rolled about and talked for hours without remem-
bering her experience, but who came out of her session
greatly refreshed and with a capacity for sensuous
enjoyment unknown to her before.
   In mentioning these two experiences, I want to share
           Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious          169

a sense of trust with which I have been left after the
initial        —
        worry a trust which, I believe, may be bene-
ficial for other patients to be surrounded with in sim-
ilar situations. We psychiatrists are prone to ^ut great
faith in the value of verbal expression and tend to
underrate the value of motoric expression as displayed
by these    patients, calling   it   ]ust   psychomotor   excite-
ment. Though pure instances of this, like the above,
are rare, I think they are important to know of, be-
cause of the light they shed on the non-verbal dimen-
sion of every drug experience, if not every therapeutic
session.
                                                     CHAPTER V

                                                  IBOGAINE:
                        FANTASY AND REALITY



Ibogaine is one of the twelve alkaloids obtained from
the root of the plant Tabernanthe iboga found in West
Africa. From vague reports as to its local use in the
Congo, it was believed to be mainly a stimulant, and
it is as such that it is mentioned in De Ropp's Drugs

and the Mind. It is a stimulant, too, that iboga extract
was introduced into French medicine several decades
ago.i
   In July 1966 I presented, at the conference on
psychedelic substances organized in San Francisco by
Richard Baker (Roshi) for the University of Cali-
fornia, a report on my initial work with the alkaloid
as an adjunct to psychotherapy, which described the
hallucinogenic effects of the higher doses of ibogaine.
Since then, it has been used in a similar context by an
increasing number of psychiatrists, mostly in South
America.
   For the writing of the present account, I have
examined notes from forty therapeutic sessions with
thirty patients, in which I used either ibogaine or total
iboga extract, plus ten sessions with a different group,
in which I used iboga extract in conjunction with one
or another amphetamine. In my general statements,

     iGershon's finding that ibogaine   is   an inhibitor of   MAO
(monoamine oxidase) explains its classic use and shows that
it was the first antidepressant of this kind in official medicine,

much    before the advent of iproniazide, Tofranil, and so on.
                               171
172                  The Healing Journey
I  am also drawing upon a wider experience not doc-
umented by notes which I could use for statistics. This
is partly direct experience with additional patients and
partly information amassed in clinical meetings with
my  colleagues at the University of Chile. I estimate the
total number of treatments which I have either wit-
nessed or known indirectly to be approximately one
hundred.
   As to physical effects, neither ibogaine nor the
harmala alkaloids cause dilation of the pupils or a
rise in blood pressure, as is the case with the LSD-like
hallucinogens or the amphetamine derivatives              MDA
and MMDA. Ibogaine also resembles harmaline in
that it elicits a disturbance in body balance and vom-
iting more often than any other mind-affecting chem-
ical aside from alcohol.
   In view of the high incidence of these symptoms, it
is advisable to administer the drug when the patient