which I heard this story that I thought thai it was
Jesus as a child that had been crucified.) Perhaps
my believing Him a small boy made crying and
feeling sorry for Him easier. Then came school.
And God now sat on a cloud, in a distant sky,
and wore a beard. And the eye within the triangle.
The  eye that persecuted Cain. We were told about
thisbearded God on the cloud, that this is not how
He really was, and we weren't told anything else
about Him. But much was said about the eye in
the triangle. It was the eye of God, the most im-
portant, alive and active part, which was always
present, seeing us, watching us, the part that told
each of us how wicked we were and repeated it
second after second. And God, with His eye, was
a menace.
   Then my mother's God. It had much of Allah
and a lot of class consciousness. Everything that
happened was God's will. Whatever one did would
not affect the way God had set things up. There-
fore, there was no reason to be affected, or an-
noyed, and no reason to seek. There was no way
of changing anything or doing anything. All was
predetermined by God, and destiny reigned over
everything. To rebel was a waste of time. More-
over, Jesus was not God. This was something to
satisfy the imagination of the people. But a "cul-
tivated" person didn't have to believe in Jesus'
divinity. Christ was not for the aristocrats, who
were bom mystics, who believed in God and felt
God from the time of their bu^. Christ was a
means of explaining God to the people, the vulgar
and stupid ones who needed religious precepts to
behave like human beings, or would otherwise lose
control and be in constant revolution. Yet my
mother, who did not believe in Christ, did believe
in about a half-dozen virgins and a long list of
saints.
1   58                    The Healing Journey
          Then came the processions in southern Italy.
     We     also               at home, but ours were
                    had processions
     beautiful, with many flowers and were followed
     by fireworks. They were grand parties, when ev-
     erybody rejoiced; delicious food was cooked in
     all the houses, and special pastry was made which
     was eaten only on the occasion of certain feasts.
     Not in southern Italy. Nobody was gay there.
     Those in the procession suffered and the on-
     lookers, too. They wore hoods. Hooded old men
     dressed in black sang sad songs out of tune. And
     the people looked, tightly pressed against each
     other, and cried. Women knelt down on the street,
     others screamed hysterically, and not a few of
     them fainted. This was a vindictive God, who
     demanded blood for the blood He had shed. He
     received all that shouting and theatrical suffering.
     These events fasdnated me and caused me repug-
     nance at the same time. God, my God, was not
     in them. He was outside myself. Not a God of
     love any more, but a butcher-God wanting vic-
     tims, and I didn't want to be one of them.
        Then came the Swiss-clock God. I had to study,
     had to eat apples, had to go to Mass. Children's
     Mass, at eight-fifteen in the morning. Not in the
     afternoon, for this        was   laziness.   Nobody asked me
     whether        I   wanted to go to Mass. After      my   First
     Communion, I had to ask for                  Communion
                                               every
     Sunday. I was asked, "Are you going to church?"
     and this was an order more than a question, the
     way     I   was asked, "Did you brush your teeth?"
         (I hated   it   at this time.)
        Then, distance.
        An indefinite discomfort
        Doubts. Preoccupation, always. But God was
     very far away. God, lost. A wish to return. Now
     and then. Communion. But then doubt again, in-
     difference, and search. At last, God was buried.
     It doesn't interest me. I don't see why I should
     have to. And then came the symptoms. I cannot
     enter a church. In the church is the eye. Really,
        Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious           159

  the eye    is   everywhere, watches and accuses the
  children   who    don't behave.

   All this was written on the day following that of
the harmaline experience, and the text shows the im-
portance of this effort. This is not the only instance
in which the process of expressing in written form the
content of a drug session is almost as significant as
the session itself. What is repressed is so repressed
that associations and feelings, if not images, may be
 ^forgotten" if they are not told. In this mstance, it is
particularly understandable that this might tend to
happen, as the session involved the discovery of al-
most intolerable                 which made her feel
                      guilt. It is this
at the beginning of   her writing that she was going
crazy or titat she was dead. Yet this feeling changed
as she became aware of guilt as such, of the eye of
God that had persecuted her all through her life and
now lay buried in her unconscious. Yet this is a very
fragmentary report, she says, and it took her about
a month before she attempted to recapture more of the
experience. Some of this is contained in the following
paragraphs, which constitute a valuable document for
the psychology of religion:

     After the      ingestion of harmaline, I decided-
                   first
   ly felt the         God to justify death. Useless
                  need of
   death, unnecessary death of those who die in tiie
   wars, of those whose lives are left incomplete. I
   believe that I can now see more clearly. I needed
   to justify death in general and not just that of
   those who died in war. And I think that, as I had
   to justify death, what I finally had to justify is
   the absurdity of a liuMted, finite life, where death
   is implied.
     I shall try to        remember   my   thoughts after the
   second harmaline experience. The only death
   which could be justified was that of Christ. Each
   one of us was responsible for making His death
   something justifiable and not just one more useless
   death. That is, the sacrifice of God's son was not
   justified in itself. Every one of us could kill Oirist
                                                     —
1   60                The Healing Journey
     once more or resurrect Him. And hence Com-
     munion. This was a conscious, voluntary act show-
    ing one's readiness to justify the death of Christ
    justify it through profound respect and love to-
    ward everything that lives, for in every living
    being there lies a divine essence. This was a way
    of partaking of a universal harmony. It was also
    a way of resurrecting the Christ in the depths of
    each one of us. But diere was also a more human
    side in my longing for Communion. This was a
    longing to be united in brotherhood to other beings
    who professed this same love of Christ toward
    living beings. It was a way of feeling less alone, a
    way to belong in a group without any loss of
     individuality.