^   Human   Preference Test, by the present author.
52               The Healing Journey
He had two     brief love affairs before marrying, one at
sixteen  and the other at twenty. He met his wife at
the university and established a good friendship with
her that still endured after six years. He had now been
married for four years and had two children, for whom
he felt much tenderness.
   After the ingestion of 150 mg. of  MDA    the patient's
first symptom was anxiety, a fleeting wish to cry, which
he controlled, and then a sensation of his arms and
chest being smaller, thinner. "Does this suggest any-
thing?" "BetQg a child, I suppose."
   For the next hour or so, he enjoyed the music
greatly and playfully moved his arms and legs to its
rhythm. "Supple, as if I ran naked in the wind."
   Aside from the experience described, most of the
content of the seven hours that the session lasted was
related to the patient's mouth. At first he felt that
his jaw was clenched and tried to open it more and
more with the help of his hands. He constantly felt
his face and jaws. Then he initiated movements that
suggested those of sucking, and when this was called
to his attention, he intentionally engaged in sucking
movements for a long time. All along, he felt that his
jaws were tense and painful and kept feeling them.
His lower and left molars were hurting, too, and this
persisted until the following day. At another moment,
he felt like opening his mouth wide and pulling his
tongue out, and for some time, with his mouth wide
open, he felt like exhaling forcefully. Then he felt cold,
started moving to the music again, and went on open-
ing his mouth, pulling out his tongue, or sucking. He
explained (in English) that he had been concerned
with his jaws earUer in his life, since at the time of
puberty he did not want to masticate with force for
fear of distorting the oval shape of his face.
   The patient's first words, at some point in the sec-
ond hour after the initial symptoms, were to say that
he realized that he had never been loved, that this
might have been    so, but he never really beheved and
felt with certainty that somebody cared for him. After
this, he spoke English and continued to use this lan-
guage for the rest of the session, in spite of having
                 MDA,    the   Drug of Analysis                 53

only learned it in school and being far less jfluent in
it than in Spanish. On one occasion he spoke French,

too, and at several points in the session he commented
with surprise on the fact of having forgotten the Span-
ish language   —^but this did not seem to trouble him.
He spoke a   few  sentences in Spanish again after imag-
ining his father as the back of a seat with a metal
frame. I asked him to talk to his father and he said
in Spanish and with some resistance, "Why do you go
away?" "Why don't you stay at home?" "Why don't
you embrace me?"
  Knowing that the       patient's   stammering had started
during his first year of school, I questioned him about
this period of his hfe, and he recalled a certain day
oa which a bunch of children unjustly blamed him for
having pushed a smaller boy. One of them threatened
to punch him in the mouth, but he could not quite
remember whether he had actually been hit. He spent
approximately an hour reflecting on the scene. He
imagined himself with his mouth full of blood, tended
to believe that he had begun stuttering on this very
day, and thought that he must have felt a victim of
great injustice and very helpless.
   After this day and for the following month, the
patient noticed a surprising effect of the session on his
movements, which became supple and unusually co-
ordinated. He felt it as he played the guitar and the
recorder, as he worked in carpentry in his spare hours,
and at night, when he no longer felt the usual dis-
comfort of not knowing where to put his arms before
sleeping. Aside from this physical effect, he felt un-
usually warm toward his children and patient in deal-
ing with the events of family life. When presented once
more with the HPT, two days after the session, his
responses were very different from the week before;
the main theme in his rejections was predominantly
not that of "delinquent" traits any more, but half of
his comanents referred to expressions in the mouth area
of the faces depicted.      Those most often mentioned
were fear and a wish to     cry, too much showing of the
teeth,   or falseness.   In such emphasis of the mouth
and rejection of    feelings expressed in         it,   the testing
54               The Healb^g Journey
                                                   MDA
situation paralleled tiie subject*s experience in the
session, during which the mouth had been the center
of attention in terms of both physical sensations    and
fantasy.
    Etespite the well-being experienced by the patient,
 the therapeutic process described above suggested it-
self as incomplete for the following reasons:  .




    1) Incomplete expression of feeling: At the begin-
ning of the session, the patient felt hke crying, but did
not give in to the urge. At the end of the day, he
feared that he might feel suicidal, but again felt only
on the brink of sadness. These brief experiences, his
life history (crying in closets), the lack of any intense
feelings throughout the session, and the rejection of
sad expressions in the test showed that he was still
not ready to accept or even know his own emotions.
   2) Incomplete recall: Symptoms of regression dur-
ing the session (sucking movements, shrinking of the
body) strongly suggest that the patient's mind was un-
consciously wanting to come to grips with episodes in
the past, and this is further confirmed by the school
scene that he remembered in part. Yet here, as in the
case of feelings, the patient only comes to the brink of
remembering an episode, the existence of which he is
able to sense. The emotions which he imagines that he
had when bullied at school (crying, rage, impotence)
match those that he perceived and rejected in the
HPT.
   3) Incomplete insight: The patient's experience in-
dicates that he has grown up with a feeling of not being
loved, that he missed his father, and that at least once
he was permanently affected by being unjustly blamed
and attacked by other children. This in turn suggests
that he was facing the latter situation much on his
own, without expecting any support from his parents
or teachers. Again, this whole picture matches the feel-
ings of anxiety and sorrow fleetingly experienced dur-
ing the day of the session and subsequently perceived
by the subject as foreign to his habitual views and feel-
ings. The following day, he considered this experience
of helplessness a mere theoretical possibility, to say
nothing of his perceiving in his parents' past behavior
               MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis             55