Criminals!"
                 MDA, the Drug of Analysis              57
  By   the middle of the third hour he explained how he
remembered    that in his first or second year of school he
found a smaU jewel (a diamond apparently), which he
kept without knowing its value. He was accused of
theft and he swallowed the stone. He clearly remem-
bered that he was given an enema and forced to vomit,
in order to retrieve the jewel. Now he had the fantasy
of still having something inside. He vaguely distin-
guished two packages.    A
                        small one behind his sternum,
and a larger one below. He opened the smaller one
and found the diamond. "The other, which I scarcely
saw and   forgot, is still unopened," he stated later, and
added: "In having discovered all this, I felt free from
something very big and heavy, as if I could breathe
deeply and for the first time in many years. But this
desire to breathe deeply and violently pointed at some-
thing which I was not able to grasp." During the rest
of the day, he interacted with others instead of with-
drawing, as in the past group sessions. After the effects
of the drug had worn off, he said goodbye to the other
group members, and while doing so was brought to
the verge of tears. Especially when saying goodbye to
me, he felt very moved and kissed me on the face as
a son would kiss a father. This was a dramatic contrast
to the feelinglessness which had made him seek treat-
ment.
   On the following day, he was overcome by an in-
tense sense that he really had no father or mother, and
this made him feel as if he had killed them. He felt,
too, that the pieces of a huge puzzle were falling into
place: dreams, fears, life situations. Yet in the course
of the week it seemed that a curtain was being drawn
over his   sight, his feelings   were dampened again, and
the story brought to mind during the session appeared
to him as less and less real.
   One further session was proposed to the patient for
reasons similar to those which precipitated the previous
one, and it is worth reporting that this particular one
was to be both the least remembered and the most
effective. In brief, during the first hours of the ses-
sion, the patient felt like a woman and enjoyed this
role; after this, he discovered that early in his life he
58                    The Healing Journey
had taken on a feminine identification on the assump-
tion that he would thus attract his father's love. To be
a woman meant, principally, to be feeling and sensitive,
like his mother. But at some point in his life he had
told himself, "Men do not cry,"         —
                                   this phrase came up
repeatedly in his       MDA
                         experiences           —
                                        and he became
anaesthetized. On this occasion, too, his feelings state
led into a brief period of feelinglessness, incoherence,
and then indifference. "The value of this was to see a
caricature of myself," he later said. "What I am al-
ways, to some extent, I was then to the extreme." What
happened in his unconscious while he was feeling like
a woman or being incoherent or indifferent is hard to
know, but only after this session did the patient feel
that he had taken a definitive step toward emotional
sanity.    A
          fleeting state of anxiety made him realize that
this was the condition in which he had Uved all his
life before the treatment and which he had not even
remembered for some months. And furthermore, it
seemed to him that the whole world had changed, even
though he felt himself the same person. When ques-
tioned on the nature of the change, he said that it was
difl&cult to put into words, but was something Uke
"being related" to others. "I don't have to control
others, for I no longer depend on their acceptance or
rejection. I can accept them regardless of whether they
accept me or not. K they do, fine; if not, too bad; but
I have no need to spend energy in a sort of CIA ac-
tivity to detect how I am to others." In addition, his
efficiency at work has improved, according to his es-
timate, 1,000 per cent
    Some months after the beginning of his treatment,
he summarized these changes in a letter, on the oc-
casion of my last days in the country. Toward the end,
he posed the question: "What happened during the
last session that brought about the crystallization of
this deUcate upper crust of sanity, which I nevertheless
feel is permanent? I could go on answering, "Nothing
. •   simple. While I was there, the world was replaced
       .


by a different one."
     "Some     facts I see.   During the   first   stage of the ses-
sion, I lived in a closet,       my   hell.   But now     that I re-
               MDA,   the   Drug   of Analysis        59

member, the most unpleasant   feeling that I can remem-
ber    that of rejection, and, reflecting well, that this
      is
was not so painful after all. Hell was nothing but the
release of much feeling, and much of this was quite
pleasurable. In the second stage, I could see myself as
I have lived for years: incapable of loving."
   This is how the person that suffered from feeling-
lessness ends his letter:
   "Qaudio, friend, I know that I cannot give  you any-
thing like what   you have given me.       I   know
                                                that you
have not even expected this letter. I          know
                                                that you
have not even expected the affection which you know
that I can only feel in spite of myself. I know that you
accepted me knowing that I hold a faith that teaches
giving what you give, and which I imitated out of com-
pulsion. I know Siat you are happy about me.
   "Now you leave. I shall not thank you. That would
be adding a flower to your garland, which you leave
behind. I want to say to you what my father never
heard, what I could never say to him, for I had no
chance, or he did not give it to me, who knows?: I
love you.
  "My   wife, my sons, others that meet me will never
know  of the friend that you are, but if they knew, they
would have to smile, with the same smile that I now
have, hidden, for a long time, for this occasion.
  "Have a good    trip."