mo3t relevant to         his       symptom   —according
                                                 to the
patient's account prior to the           MDA
                                      treatment:
   "From information given to me repeatedly and
with much emphasis by members of my family, my
mother had to spend the nine months of her pregnancy
in bed since she had a heart disease that later led to
her death [when the patient was nine]. When I was
bom, the midwife was upset at the difficulty of the de-
livery and she twisted my right foot. For that reason,
I was not able to walk until I was approximately iSve
years old, at which age I was cured after many treat-
ments.
   "All these circumstances that surrounded my birth
caused my parents to give me a lot of care, and they
thus spoiled me, made me nervous and stubborn,
which in turn made my older brother very angry. He
did not dissimulate his irritation, but was constantly
bullying me and calling me *Uttle pansy' and 'sissy.' I
suffered very much for this and was permanently cry-
ing, since he was six years older and much stronger,
and I could not fight him, and the times in which I
tried to defend myself I got the worst of it. I would
get so mad at him that on some occasions I threw
knives or scissors at him and hurt him. In spite of
what I have said, my brother was my father's favorite,
since he pointed to him as an example of intelligence
 and manliness, and always encouraged him and ap-
proved of what he did. This was never the case with
me.
   "Since   my     brother did not         let   me
                                         play with him
and   I   had no   friends, I             my time with
                                    had to spend
            —
my sisters espedally with the older of them, whom
I love very much and to whom I am very close. From
this relationship, I think, I picked up the effeminate
manners for which my brother scorned me and which
gave me problems during the first years of school.
   "As to my mother, though I believe that she loved
me, she never expressed this affection, in contrast to
my father, who was much more expressive than she
was."
   About one hour after the intake of 100 mg. of          MDA
 (a small dose for this patient), he reported some diz-
                                                        —
42                 The Healing Journey
ziness,   and nothing further developed for the following
fifteen minutes.   At             asked him to look at
                        this point, I
my   face and report on whatever he saw in my expres-
sion. At once he felt that my way of lookmg at him
was similar to his stepmother's, so I asked him to pre-
tend I actually was his stepmother looking at him with
the expression that he perceived. How would he trans-
late this expression mto words? What would "step-
mother" say to make her attitude more explicit?
"Sissy!" she would say. "Sissy! Sissy! Always running
after your father, attached to him like a little gurl."
Now I asked him to answer her as he would have an-
swered as a boy if he had dared to say what he felt.
"I hate you! I hate you!" For the following five minutes
or so, I asked him to shift one role to die other and
thus sustain a dialogue with his stepmother, which led
to further expression of his feelings of being victimized,
his helplessness, his need for his father as his only pro-
tection from her attacks. At this point, a reminiscence
gradually began to dawn on him. "Something happened
                   —
with the gardener ^there was a gardener in the house
and something happened, I don't remember what ^it       —
                                        —
was in the garage, that I remember ^I see myself sit-
ting on his lap—can this be true?" Then there was an
image of the gardener's penis and his sucking it, then a
feeling of his face being wet, all of a sudden, and his
perplexity. All this had something to do with little
pictures which came in cigarette packages, and he
gradually remembered that tiWs man gave them to him
in exchange for sexual manipulations. And he did not
want them for himself . • . no, for his sister . . . yes,
for his sister he would do this, so that she would have
these little prints for her collection ... for she was
competing with his older brother, he now recalls, and
his brother . . . (now he remembers the important
part) ... his brother caught him! He remembers hun
looking mto the garage, and he remembers his own
fear — ^his brother would tell his parents!

   It took about five hours to reconstitute the whole
situation brought about by the long-forgotten episode.
Most of his insights and memories are smnmed up in
the following pages written     on the following day:
                MDA, the Drug of Analysis             43

     "When I was caught by my brother I was very afraid.
I   ran to my sister and told her I had been discovered
and that Fernando, who did not love me, would teU
mother on me. She was very afraid of my father and
was so frightened he would beat her that she begged
me to plead guilty and say that I had liked what I had
done. 'Please, you are the king of the house, they will
not beat you, but me, yes.' I beUeve she was affection-
ate to   me   in order to get   my   father's love in exchange.
  "When Fernando caught me, he thought, 'Ha, ha!
Hie kmg of the ho^se is a sissy! I am the only man.'
My   molher was in a rage. 'I will beat you. Why did
you do it?' 'Because I liked it.' 'Ah, so you liked it!'
and she filled my mouth with pepper. I kept saying, 'I
liked it, I liked it, and I will tell Daddy on you!' She
became more angry and thought, 'Just like his father.'
'Aha, so you liked it!' And she sprained my foot.
   "My sister: 'Poor little fellow! What have they done
to you because of me, because you would not tell on
me? They have sprained the foot of the king of the
house. Poor little kid.'
   "Younger sister: 'So you are to blame! See what
they have done to Roberto on your account. You are
bad. I am going to tell on you.'
   "Father: 'See what Sarah did! How did you dare get
the boy into this? It is you that is to blame!' And he
hit her with a ruler on the soles of her feet. 'Don't
beat her, Daddy. I liked it, I Uked it!'
   "Mother: 'What have I done? I sprained his foot,
and my husband will get angry. Forgive me, Roberto,
I didn't know what I was doing.'
   "I: 'You stmk. Mother, why don't you bathe? Don't
pick me up at school, Mother, because I feel ashamed
of you. I want my father to go. He is nice, you are
bad. You don't love me, you sprained my foot.'
   "Mother: 'There goes the pansy again. He wants to
go with his father, the two of them are of the same
kind. Weak. The only man in the house is Fernando.
He is my son, he is like me.'
   "I: 'So that hurts you to see that I am a pansy. That
is what I am going to be, and I will teU my father
every time you call me that.'
                   "                                           —
44                  The Healing Journey
     "Father:   *What a bitch I married! What has she ddne
to her son! I can unagine what she thinks of me
just the same as of him. In truth, the only man in the
house is Fernando, who resembles her.'
   "Fernando: *My father loves Roberto best, but after
telling on Roberto I have Mother to myself.'
   "Younger sister: *After tellmg on Sarah I have
Father for myself. Poor little kid! How sad it is that
they have spramed his foot See, Daddy, how I love
Roberto, too.'
   "Fernando: Tansy, pansy! The only man in the
house is me.'
   "I: *Daddy, Fernando called me a pansy.'
   *Tather: *Don*t bother your brother, Fernando.
Don't you see that he is nervous since the accident
with his foot?'