The           of "entering" an image, becoming it,
          process
and      in this     manner
                     reassimilating a quality that was
being disowned, is familiar to us from Gestalt therapy
and has a long tradition that antedates psychotherapy
as we now know it. The classical Hindu sculptor, for
instance,  would meditate on the god to which he was
to give form, by first summoning his image to mind
and then becoming it. A similar practice, without its
artistic end, is found in the Jewish Kabbalah and in
magical traditions. Gods that are invoked in such prac-
tices are particular functions or processes of the mind,
and so are the images most usually dealt with in
psychotherapy. In the present instance, the tube stands
      4 Italics   mine.
                                     —
               Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality              217
for the whole of the patient's life      her own life —   and
yet is bottomless and goes beyond. It is certainly a
great event to find such a door to knock at. The
possibility of entering is already awaiting the person
who sees the entrance, which is the synthetic view (if
only a view) of his existence. I have been surprised by
the frequency with which tubes are seen under the
effects of ibogaine, and I want to share my impression
that these generally constitute such an "entrance," so
that they are valuable clues to act upon.      We  have seen
the tube in two of the cases already reported, but
further illustrations may serve to clarify its signifi-
cance. The following is part of a session where the
patient had been visualizing image after image without
any strong feelings or interest in them. They appeared
rather meaningless and disconnected from one an-
other, and there seemed (to us) to be no definite
pattern or development apparent in their progression.
    At one point, tihe subject visualized a drum. This is
very much an image of the ibogaine world, because of
its association with impulse, power, movement, and
perhaps primitiveness. It can also be seen as a varia-
tion on the tube theme, because of its cylindrical shape
and its emptiness. I asked the patient to impersonate
this instrument, and he described how he was be-
coming a large golden drum, only used to beat upon
 on great historical occasions. Then the drum rolled
down a hill and ended up becoming a general's cap.
 It belonged to a very insignificant man, who put on
 airs by acting in a domineering manner. Such an in-
 significant man appears to be the opposite of the great
 golden drum, suggesting feelings of inadequacy that
 the patient is covering up behind a pompous self-
 image. It is interesting that the transition from one
 image to the other is mediated by a rolling down of
 the drum, reminiscent of the falling down through the
 tube in the previous example. Letting go of an inflated
 self-image wiU naturally feel like a falling into one's
 self, or, at least, a falling into an area of insignificance,
 darkness, and unpleasantness, in the midst of which the
 true self is to be encountered. I now asked the patient
 to be the general, and as he was in the process of
218              The Healing Journey
becoming   this character,   he saw a tube with no ending,
lika a train. I ask   him    to enter the tube, and it be-
came a  jet, and tfien a little airplane that flew play-
fully.These are images of energy, and I feel inclined
to understand the sequence as a process of the pa-
tient's contacting his drive-energy through the "fall-
ing" involved in becommg msignificant. The tube marks
the point of transition, an endless hollow. But this
immediately became full of dynamism, first by the
superimposition of the idea of a train in motion, and
then a jet. Jets, spurts (remember the gushing sap),
and beams of light could all be understooi as the tube
coming to life, or as life flowing through its hollow-
ness  — ^just as in our first case, where the subject re-

ceived the white light as he looked up the periscope-
like tube he had created. In taking the form of an
airplane, the "jet" energy became individualized, for
it is obvious from the patient's description of its mis-

chievous looping that he was speaking of his own style
of being. In fact, he discovered this by himself. This
flying reflected his real feelings. He flew like a playful
little boy, small and eager to explore, wanting more
and more, and enjoying the display of his own ability.
He did not experience his smallness as insignificance,
as the general did, nor did he have to struggle for
competitive greatness. The energy locked up in his
"drum personality" was now released to a more direct
enjoyment of himself, and instead of the gold that, in
the drum, conveyed greatness to others, he relished his
own feelings in the golden light of the sun.
    After some time of enjoying the feeling of freedom
in an open world, he (the airplane) felt the need of
 a direction and flew toward the sun. He hesitated as
he drew near, fearing a destruction like that of Icarus.
Nevertheless, he proceeded, entered the sun, and found
paradise behind it.
    The airplane, after all, is only a transformation of
the endless tube, which may be the channel for a force,
but not the source itself. The little plane played in
the light of the sun as the sun's child, and though it
had an activity of its own, we might say that its move-
ment toward the sun stemmed from the sun's attrac-
                     Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality    219
tiion.   The plane  a portion of energy that wants more
                       is
of   itself,   and    finds by returning to its source. It
                     this   it

is literally a "vehicle," not the end, and it stands in
face of the sun like the son in face of the father (see
Jacob's case), or like the ego in face of the self.