Dr. N.   tells       me     to imagine a mountain,       which I
  do   easily   .   .   .   but   I   do not see   it.   The mountain   is
  not there, like the previous images, but I only
  have the "idea" of a mountain in front of me.
  And not in front of me, really, but in me.
    I describe the mountain. It is a truncated cone,
  very high, and of a blue-gray color. Strangely, if
  I were to see it, it would be different from all the
  mountains that I know.
     I am asked to climb this mountain, and I see
  (from here onward I shall speak of "seeing"
  things, though the comment above continues to
  hold true) a very high ladder and innumerable
   men    climbing           it   in a row, like ants.
                      and I do not go about it in the
       I start climbing,
  normal way, but on the side of the ladder, with
  one of the side rails between my legs, placing one
  foot in front and the other behind the rungs. I
  feel the rung between my thighs, and this suggests
  bicycle riding. Without any choice, there I am, on
  a bicycle. Gone are the mountain, ladder, and
  men. I am riding a bicycle in a street with a lot
  of traffic. I feel that I am intermingling with
  people and vehicles traveling at high speed. There
  is great disorder.              A
                        train going at hi^ speed ap-
  pears, and heads toward a tunnel. In passing
  through it, it tears off its concrete coating. Now
  it is a train covered with concrete, like a giant

  beetle, which goes on and on, penetrating every-
  thing that is in its way, and going under the
  bridges instead of over them. I would say that the
  crazy engineer wants to go through every hole
   that   he   finds.
        Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious   141

   But we must return to our mountain. Time now
proceeds at a normal tempo, the mad rush of the
previous scene being over. There are no other
men now, and I am getting to the top of the
mountain. The ladder is just as tall as the moun-
tain, so that, on grasping the last rung, I am
touching the very edge of the mountain top. This
edge is very fragile and breakable, so I find no
other solution then to enter with my whole body,
like a reptile. I say "enter," for the mountain is
hollow.
   I    am
         deciding on the best way of descending
when   strange beings appear, climbing the walls.
They   are like giant rats with bulging eyes and
spider feet. They look at me and follow their way
to the top where they wander along the edge.
   I am on my belly like a worm and I crawl
along. I have come down a considerable distance.
I cannot resist looking up at the place through
which I entered. It is almost a luminous spot, but
—  looking downward from the opening I see    —
myself! The descent goes on, and there is a Dan-
tesque sight. There is, at the bottom, a sea of
fire surrounded by a beach of white sand, which
encloses the fire hke a ring. The ground on which
I find myself is dry and rough. I do not know
how I came to be on the beach and on my feet.
   I look at the sight. It is marvelous —a fiery sea.
What a strange mixture of water and fixe in which
water does not extinguish the fire and fire does
not evaporate the water. The fiery waves, break-
ing close to the beach and caressing it, turn to
crystalline fresh water.
    I slowly draw closer. I can see the foam. I
 touch it and enter the water. It is fresh, refresh-
 ing,   very refreshing.
    I am instructed to approach the fire. I am
 afraid of getting burned, though something tells
 me that I will not be burned. I question     my
                                            rea-
 sons for being in that mountain. Why am I here?
 What am I here for? And I feel like returning.
 Dr. N. then insists: "Try to enter the fire. After
142                  The Healing Journey
  all, if  you happen to die that will be only an illus-
  ion,    and it may prove to be worthwhile."
      I   then continue to advance, and the water now
  reaches my calves. It is now that I contact the
  fire. Before breaking, one of the waves touches
  my leg, and, far from burning me, it tickles me.
  Soon I am swimming in the midst of the sea of
  flames. I swim like a frog.
     I was expecting it    —
                          Dr. N. asks me to dive into
  this sea of fire and see what is beneath. I do it,
  and I feel myself swimming vigorously, head
  down. I do not feel fire any longer, only water. I
  do not need to breathe, and I could go on swim-
  ming indefinitely. I try to reach the bottom, but
  without success. I think of returning. The excuse
  is the same: lack of incentive. But I am well into
  all this, and it is not the time to worry. I must
  get to the bottom.
     The water pets clear, and now T dimly see the
  bottom of the fiery sea. It is of white sand. I touch
  it with mv hands. It is coarse. I am with my feet

  on the sand, now, and I walk, half-floating. I see,
  to the left, giant pearls (sixty centimeters in dia-
  meter, approximately) which look wet, like they
  were perspiring. There is no plant life. The sea
  bottom     is sterile.
      To my right I see three naked women. Two
  are white and the other black. Only black in
                                       and they are
  color, for their bodies are identical,
 like   one woman. The three have exceedingly
 beautiful breasts. I feel instantly attracted and
 would like to make love to her (or them?).
     Once more, I am struck by the absence of
 humidity on this sea bed, in spite of the fact that
 it's all under the water. There is nothing that I

 feel as wetness, that wetness that gives warmth
 to things, which enhances their odor, and is to me
 an expression of life. Though the pearls are wet,
 I am not satisfied with them. I look for plant life,
 green color, smell of earth or sand or wet grass,
 and I do not find it.
       Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious            143