have cited both sequences in spite of their similar-
    I
ity,precisely because of the consistency that this re-
semblance indicates, where as a single piece of fantasy
might appear as a rather chaotic or arbitrary array of
images. In both, she experiences the familiar fear of
falling and the search for support (on the tree or the
walls). Yet her confrontation of fear in both leads to
                                         —
unsuspected embodiments of danger the common-
place man resembling an assailant and the crocodile
falling from the sky.  A   crocodile became part of the
patient's fantasy in the later episode (already quoted),
which xmderlines its signijBcance in spite of its present
appearance as a lifeless plastic object. This appearance,
like the transformation of animals into toys or cartoons,
is a common process by which the mind protects itself
from the feelings potentially conveyed by some images.
Interestingly, the colors of this crocodile are very rele-
vant to her phobia: the gray of the avoided streets
(like the color of the sky from which it falls in this
fantasy) and the green of trees that make them toler-
able.
   Like the crocodile and the human "aggressor," the
mad   traffic in both episodes conveys violence which
the patient was not aware of fearing in the streets on the
occasions when she experienced anxiety and the ac-
companying physical symptoms. The dreams now con-
front her with faces she would normally avoid looking
at (and this session actually marked the end of her
avoidance of looking at the screen in the movies). Such
faces were later associated with war memories, and
precisely one —  that of the man with a wounded cheek
—  evoked the repressed memory of a wounded soldier
running in the street that had impressed her deeply
as a child.
   The overall effect of this session was positive to the
patient in many ways, but her phobia persisted. There
was a change in the quality of her fear, though. Where-
as it had always been that of fainting or falling in the
street, it now took the form of a fear of aggression.
154                      The Healing Journey
The wheels    of trolley buses and truck noises seemed
menacing           now, and for the first time she had
                to her
fantasies of being attacked by a man with a knife.
Associations to the symptom in subsequent psycho-
analytic sessions were richer and included consideration
of the assailant mentioned above, which took place
when she was fourteen, and which she remembered,
but had never mentioned or seen as important in any
respect.
      Two monthsafter the session quoted above and the
change         symptoms, she was administered harm-
            in her
aline for a second time, following which she wrote an
account from which I am quoting at length because of
its   manifold    interest.


        I   have great     diflBculty reliving the experience.
      I don't   remember  anything. I have only discon-
                                  —        —
      nected images: the girl ^myself in front of the
      church on a dusty road, myself at Communion,
      receiving the Host from an invisible hand at a
      grandiose altar.
         I feel that I am going crazy. Something inside.
      Indescribable. It is not anxiety. Not depression.
      Yet something of both. Irritation, disorientation.
      / am dead. I still have to come back to life. Sex.
      I cannot accept it. It is bad. I like it, I am bad. I
      strongly feel that God and sex cannot go together.
      I need God, and I am all sex. It is horrible. I
      suspect that there must be some way of fitting
      things together, but outside myself, not inside. I
      am facing a reality of mine that I cannot accept.
      I believe this makes me feel as I do.
         I also knew yesterday why I couldn't go out in
      the street. Not now. It escapes me.      Now
                                              I remem-
      ber. I could cross the   Alameda; I could do it at
      the same spot at which I failed to do it in the
      previous session. This was after the doctor left. /
      crossed with all ease, dancing. The music was in-
      side myself. The dress I wore was red, very tight,
      glittering, with brilliant golden ornaments. But
      this dress was my own skin. I crossed the Ala-
      meda dancing, passing between the automobiles
         Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious          155