These excerpts are raou^ to show several of the
motifs that are characteristic of ibogaine imagery: light
(and particularly its white and blue colors), animals
(and more specifically the feline ones), rotating motion
and circular shapes, and the tube. The latter, in the
present context, appears to be linked to the image of
darkness, downward movement and enclosure, consti-
tuting a complex that is the polar opposite of that of
the beam of white light from above, and tiie sense of
freedom implicit in &e beguming scenes. Later on in
this chapter, I shall explain in great detail how the
                                      —
1 82             The Healing Journey
image of the tube may play an important role in ibo-
gaine sessions, and had I had more experience in this
matter at the time, I would have waited for the com-
pletion of the descent which the patient was already
envisaging, and probably encouraged him to fall into
the darkness. Yet the outcome of this particular epi-
       —
sode ^the sudden outburst of aggression taMng place
at the end — also illustrates a frequent trait of ibogaine
experiences, and I suspect a partial therapeutic break-
through. Such hostility might be understood as the polar
opposite to the feeling of enclosure in the previous
imare, which I have often seen as its antecedent in
other instances —   either in the form of imagery, as a
feeling of restraint, lack of freedom, heavy apatiiy, or
as a physical sensation of being held in and limited in
the body. I feel drawn to interpret such experiences as
an inward-turning and paralysis of the aggressive poten-
tial in the personality, which, once directed toward its
natural target outside, leads to feelings of relief, free-
dom, and power. In this instance, however, the patient's
guilt after stabbing the munmiy with his knife is far
from such relief and tells us that he has withdrawn
again, still not feeling free vis-^-vis this female presence
in his inner world.
   One might wonder what relevance an experience as
impersonal as this one mav have to the therapeutic
endeavor, and more generally to a person's feelings or
behavior "in the worid/' In the present instance, the
subject feels no doubt:

    In my daily life, I kept discovering such im-
  portant little details. Everything that I said had a
  transcendence, a simple and true reality, an im-
  portance in terms of sincerity that it has even to-
  day and will continue to have tomorrow. I did
  not react in the normal way to things, but        ma
  way that was . emotional? No sensitive. I did
                 .   .


  not talk vaguely, but directly to the point, and
  made wise decisions.

  This first repercussion of the session might be under-
stood as a carry-over of an archetypal mode of per-
              Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality            1 83

caption into everyday life  —  ^not in the literal sense of
hallucinating, but in tihe sense of seeing ordinary words
and actions as instances of more universal meanings.
Even five months later, he thought that his judgments
of personal situations, aesthetic matters, and everyday
issues felt to him "more whole" than before.
    Another effect of the session was on his mood. His
description of it was "spiritual tranquillity." He had
been prone to feeling rushed most of the time, anxious
 about the expending of time and effort; now he speaks
of "a peacefulness at the certainty that the whole
world, of which I am a spectator and a part, is ex-
perientially within myself, and is not something remote
or mysterious."
  ^    his relation to others, the after-effect was one of
increased empathy, resulting from his own enhanced
introspection. Four months after the session he says:
 'I saw that I had so many parts, and to each there was

a litfle whole. And I saw that the rest of the people
were the same. There was^ such intensity of human
contact in those days! I saw myself in every attitude of
others toward what interested them. I did not identify
with them as a whole, but I understood them from
within."
    I have not seen that an experience of archetypal
content necessarily brings about the consequences that
this particular one did. Both ibogaine and harmaline
may elicit mythical, dreamlike sequences that are con-
templated with littie emotional involvement, the out-
come of such sessions being no different from what we
might expect from exposure to a film of similar content.
The experience described above, though, differed from
the passive contemplation of a film in the definite par-
ticipation of the subject in each of the scenes. He was
the recipient of the li^t, it was he who turned into
animals or mechanical parts, and whUe he saw himself
on the circular lid and tried to open it he actually
pressed with his hands on the floor. Not only was he
experiencing himself as an actor in his fantasy, but
reacting to tihie events with intense feelings and engaged
in continuous motion with his body.
   Just as the impact of a work of art will depend on
1   84           The Healing Journey
more than our sense        perceptions,   requiring   some
measure of empathy,    just as   a novel would be mean-
ingless to us unless we could identify with its charac-
ters, by stepping into Aeir shoes or unplicitly recogniz-
ing them as parts of our inner theater, the same may
be said of fantasy productions. Whether these appear
to the person as uninteresting and meaningless produc-
tions of his brain, interesting hieroglyphs, or revelations
will probably depend on the degree of his contact with
his unconscious life in general, and with the handling
of a session. But I think that this can also be subjected
to some pharmacological regulation, and I sh^ discuss
later the association of ibogaine with feeling-enhancing
drugs.
   In commenting on his session, the patient later said
that it was a surprise to him in view of his romantic
expectations. Instead of an experience of integration
into the "cosmic order or the race," *the simple and
primordial, elemental and telluric," and, in short, the
mysterious, he found "a world of my own, personal,
sincere, simple, which perhaps coincides to some ex-
tent with all my life experiences, which are not as
numerous as I would have liked, but are mine. Yes. It
was a mixture of disenchantment and wonder. Wonder!
The bluebird is in your home."
     On the whole, I thmk that this is a significant report
in that  it informs us of the importance of an experience

with virtually no personal content. This may seem a
statement in contradiction to that of the patient, who
claims to have discovered the richness of his own
world.    We  may put it differently and say that the only
personal element in the subject's experience is that of
himself as the contamer of all his feelings, the source
of all his unages and actions. But these feelings, images,
and actions are not those of his previous conscious life.
To anybody watching his movements, they would have
appeared more like those of a ritual than those of
practicality, just as his feelings are in Ae domam of the
religious or aesthetic, and his imaginings in that of the
mythical rather than the personal. And just as his ex-
perience was of intrinsic value to him at the time, its
consequence appears to be in the nature of an en-
                                                       —
                Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality         1 85