The association between                the occurrence of altered
states of consciousness           and personality changes has
been known in          all   times. Shamans of many regions
induce trance states to effect healing; mystics often
experience *Sdsionary'' states at the time of their "con-
version"; patients in the later stages of psychoanalysis
sometimes hallucinate or exhibit other transient psy-
chotic manifestations.
   The deliberate use of altered states of consciousness
in the therapeutic endeavor falls mostiy within the
domain of hypnotherapy and that of the utilization of
psychotropic drugs. Also recentiy there has arisen an
interest in the notion of "positive disintegration"
(DaJ)rowski) and the value of psychotic experience
when   properly assimilated, drug experience being by
far the metiiod of widest applicability.
  The     first   drugs to be extensively applied to the   facil-
itation of therapeutic intention          were barbiturates and
amphetamines.         An
                     intravenous barbiturate was first
employed by Laignel-Lavastine (1924) as a means of
"revesdmg the unconscious/' and later became the basis
of the procedures known as narcoanalysis (proposed
by J. S. Horsley, 1936), narcosynthesis (Grinker), and
others.
   The    first   use of a central stimulant as an adjimct to
                                   1
2                   The Healing Journey
psychotherapy seems to have been J. Delay's "amphet-
amine shock," followed by Jantz's "Weckanalyse."
Before this time, Myerson (1939) had described the
combined use of intravenous benzedrine and sodium
amytal, but interest in this procedure increased notably
in the Fifties, when intravenous amphetamines came
to be   more    frequently used.
   After the stimulants and depressants, the hallucino-
gens became an object of interest as faciliators of psy-
chotherapy. The clinical experimentation of Federking
 (1947) with small or medium dosages of mescahne
were followed by that of Abramson, who advocated
the use of small dosages of LSD-25 in the course of
psychoanalytic treatment by drug-induced state of
mind, and that of Sandison, who brought to bear a
Jungian outlook on the process.
   T^e following years saw not only the appearance of
qualitatively similar drugs (psilocybin and other trypt-
amines), but of dissimilar ways of approaching tiie
state of mind elicited by them. Outside the medical
field, many became impressed with the intrinsic spir-
itual value of the "psychedelic experience" and felt
more interest in this than in any therapeutic applica-
tion. In particular, Aldous Huxley had a great influ-
ence in calling attention to the religious and aesthetic
aspects of these drugs. Others saw such states as not
unrelated to the question of behavior change, but in
fact as the key to it, and thus designed their procedure
and setting so as to maximize the likelihood of peak
experiences. This, for instance, was the way in which
Hoflfer and Osmond approached their treatment of al-
coholics in Saskatchewan and   how the Harvard group
conducted their rehabilitation project in a Massachu-
setts prison.
   The drugs that I am dealing with in this book are
only some of those discovered or rediscovered in later
years, and suggest that we are seeing only the begin-
ning of the possibilities of elicitation of specific states
of consciousness other than the habitual one. On the
                                             —
other hand, the drugs we already know stimulants,
depressants, hallucinogens, and those to be described
in the following chapters^   —
                             vindicate that it is not one
           The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy    3

particular state of   mind that can be advantageous to
psychological exploration or therapeutic interaction:
any one of a series of artificially induced alterations in
the habitual pattern of an individual's personality may
constitute a unique advantage in the breaking of vi-
cious circles in the psyche, bringing into focus unknown
domains of feeling or thought, or facilitating correc-
tive experiences, in which underdeveloped functions
are temporarily stimulated or overdeveloped ones in-
hibited.
   The four drugs with which this book deals fall, both
chemically and in terms of their subjective eflfects, into
two groups. That of the phenylisopropylamines, com-
prising    MDA  and   MMDA,    is characterized mainly by
its effects of feeling enhancement, sharpening of atten-
tion, increased fluency in associations and communica-
tion. The other, that of the poly cyclic indoles (ibo-
gaine, harmaline) could well be called, for its effects,
"oneirophrenic," the term that Turner suggested for
the harmala alkaloids. Their effect on most subjects is
that of eliciting vivid dreamlike sequences which may
be contemplated while awake with closed eyes, with-
out loss of contact with the environment or alterations
of thiijking. Yet the quality that makes the drugs      m
both groups valuable to psychotherapy is that of fac-
ilitating access to otherwise unconscious processes,
feelings, or thoughts, a quality that deserves to be called
"psychedelic" in the sense of the word intended by Os-
mond: "mind-manifesting." Since they differ from the
hallucinogens in that they do not bring about the
perceptual phenomena, depersonalization, or changes
in thinking characteristic of the latter and yet share
with them an intensification of awareness, they might
well be called non-psychotomimetic psychedelics.
   Not only are there clear differences between the vari-
ous types of psychotropic drugs, but individual char-
acteristics iQ the effect of each and a variety of pos-
sible syndromes that each can elicit. Sometimes it may
be hard to discern anything in common between dif-
ferent possible reactions to the same drug^ but in other
instances we may discover that what appears to be
4                      The Healing Journey
very               only a diflferent presentation of the
       diflcerent is
same   process. Just as the ego loss brought about by
LSD may be experienced as an ecstasy of unity with
all things or a desperate clinging to a tenuous identity,
fear of chaos and of madness, so, too, the realistic
enhanced awareness of the present brought about by
MMDA      may be experienced as a serene fullness or,
for one who is not ready to confront the moment, tor-
menting anxiety, shame, guilt
   The number of typical syndromes elicited by each
drug is more than two, for it also depends on per-
sonality types, and each will demand some specificity
in the optimal psychotherapeutic approach. Yet much
of the therapist's attitude toward the situation wiU de-
pend on his understanding of the dimension impUed
in the above cited contrasts. It is a pcdarity of pleasure-
pain, as well as personality integration vs. disintegra-
tion at the moment, and with this I want to deal in
the following pages.




                PEAK EXPERIENCE       VS.   ENHANCEMENT
                                            OF PATHOLOGY