with some clothes. And I felt rotten guilty at
     hating a shitty woman who has screwed me up
                                                   —
     and wants to go on screwing me up.
         But enough! They will have to learn not to
     plague me in these last days that I'll spend with
     them.
              MMDA and the Eternal Now                 83

  The    episode described above might be compared to
the   period  of "worseniBg" that often supervenes at
some point in the course of deep psychotherapy with-
out drugs. In truth, the patient's hostiUty has only been
laid open, and this may be the unavoidable price for
him to pay, for the possibiUty of experiencing it fully
and understanding it, before he can leave it behind.
The utter rejection of his environment portrayed in
the patient's account may seem the very opposite of
the unconditional acceptance of reaUty that is charac-
teristic of "the  MMDA      state of mind" at its best.
How can ants matter so much to one who has felt
that not even death does? Nevertheless, the patient is
accepting his own anger to a much greater extent than
before, rather than repressing it and having it emerge
in the form of symptoms. Such anger probably con-
stitutes a defense against other feelings which he is
still not ready to experience (the loneliness of not feel-

ing himself loved or respected by his parents, for
instance) and which are triggered by certain stimuU in
the house, so we may expect that further progress in
the same direction should bring such feelings into focus
and make him less vulnerable to the heat in his room,
the ants, his father's cUents or his mother's demands.
We mi^t picture the psychological state presently
described as one in which the "amount" of serenity
remaining for the maximum of five days before is just
enough to dissolve, as it were, one layer of the mental
onionskin. But if this change remains, the same power
will be henceforth going to work on the next layer.
   A   parallel may be seen between the unveiUng of the
patient's anger and that of his fear of homosexuality.
Neither his irritability nor his sexual doubt is a mani-
festation of health and psychological balance, but now
he can   at least face them—   and facing them he faces
himself to a greater extent than when he was concerned
about the clothes that he wore or what a woman
would say of his love-making. An indication that this
is so is his evolution, for even at a later hour the same
day he was feeling as well as he ever had, and for
the following week had no more downfalls than re-
coveries of a level of well-being that had been un-
84                     The Healing Journey
known to him before. In these              moments, he would
write passages like this one:

        I have understood that there is very little that
     matters. It doesn't matter that the car doesn't
     work, that a girl won't love us, that they won't
     give us the best appointments at the university,
     that they say that I am a homosexual, that I don't
     have a   lot of    money or a kingdom, that my par-
     ents will die, that   Aunt Rose is as crazy as ever.
     It only matters, perhaps, to be able to breathe
     deeply and feel here, now, enjoying the air, and
     that fly. It doesn't matter not to be able to go to
     England, not to be a writer of a playboy.

     And    fifteen   days after the session:

          And goodbye     to the vicious circle, to the "onto-
     logical"boredom about everything, to problems,
     and psychotherapy. The Sargasso Sea is over, and
     the dark night and the storm; it is the end of
     anxiety up to the neck, depression, and shit in
     little spoonfuls. The sun is out, the sea is out,
     the world, and the fly.

     The reader may have        noticed   how   several quotations
in    which the patient expresses his new understanding
are written in the past tense: "I understood"; "I felt."
That they are conveying the patient's state at the
moment, which he confirms personally, and the fact
that they were not written before (even though he
produced a detailed description of the           MMDA
                                               session,
which is not included here) probably indicates that
the understanding belongs only to this moment, even
though it was potentially present during the height of
the effect of the drug. In other words, the state of
feeling at the time of the session was one in which
such viewpoints were implied, but which did not de-
pend upon such views. The return process can be un-
derstood as one in which the remembered feeling is
translated into explicit attitudes about specific issues.
Or, using another image, the peak experience might be
             MMDA and the Eternal Now                 85