world of Aristotle; its "circles" are those of the planets,
the sun, and the fixed stars.
   Just as in Dante's journey, only after reaching the
fullness  of the ordinary human condition (attained
after hell and purgatory) can he soar above the earth,
so most spiritual traditions recognize the need for a
via purgativa before the via unitiva, the need for man
to realize his true nature as a human bemg before he
can aspire to realize his divine nature, for him to es-
tablish order and harmony in his life before his soul
                                                —
can become receptive to the "supernatural" ^which is
only that part of the natural which lies beyond his or-
dinary understanding and awareness.
   Yet fliese stages are not clear-cut in practical reality,
for ecstatic and visionary experiences can take place
before the human personality is ready to live up to,
or even understand, thdr content Toward these exalted
states we find that spiritual schools of all lands display
a rather ambivalent attitude. On the one hand, the yogi
guru warns the disciple not to become fascinated by
the acquisition of special "powers" that may sidetrack
him from the true aim; flie Christian mystic warns
monks about the fascination of "visions" and emotion-
al rapture; the Zen master regards hallucinatory experi-
ences during meditation as makyo ("from the devil");
and, in general, we find references to danger bemg
associated with contact with the occult by the **unpre-
pared." Preparation in this context does not mean
knowledge as much as a personal development without
which the way of mysticism becomes that of magic: a
quest of the supernatural in the service of the ego
rather than one for a supernatural order to which the
ego may become subservient; the living understanding
of a greater whole in which the individual may find his
true purpose.
   On the other hand, these experiences of heaven
without purgatory, samadhi before enlightenment, grace
before mystical union, exceptional states of conscious-
ness before the attainment of full spiritual maturity,
                      —
16               The Healing Journey
are not only sought after by specific practices but re-
garded as seeds of transformation.
  I think the same twofold point of view may be
brought to bear on the peak experiences that a numbei
of psychoactive drugs may elicit in some persons,
More often than meditation disciplines or rituals, they
can bring about heaven without purgatory, the states
of insight into universal truths which are at the core
of religious mysteries, unaccompanied by insight into,
or change in, the individual's faulty personality. The
individual may use such experience for ego inflation
or for personality change, for self-justification and
stagnation, or as a light to show him the way.
   Much as can be said of the therapeutic value of peak
experiences, I think there is an advantage to the point
of view (presented in greater detail in Chapter III)
that personality change is distinct from peak experi-
ences, whatever the relationship between them may be.
Any one of them may be a step toward the other, but
it may be important to keep in mind that a "mystical

experience," for instance, only facilitates psychological
healing (by giving the individual a higher perspective
on his conflicts, for instance), and psychological health
only provides a more receptive state for the deeper
experience of reality constituting the core of peak
experiences.
   The fact that "mystical experience" sometimes
brought about by the agency of drugs of one kind or
 another seems to have a lesser bearing on the indi-
vidual's life, in general, than spontaneous experiences
of tiie same type (or tiiose that have resulted from a
systematic spiritual discipline) has often invited the
question whether the two are really of the same nature.
   It is only natural to expect a spontaneous religious
experience to be more permanent than one facilitated
by an external agent, for the mere occurrence of the
former indicates a personality that is compatible with
it or its implications. The greater the external influence

—  chemical or other ihdA is necessary to bring it
about, the more one can assume the existence of psy-
chological obstacles to it, and a gap between the values,
motivation system, and point of view of the ordinary
                                                                    7

              The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy        1


State and those characteristic of the non-ordinary. Yet
if   we
      picture the artificially induced peak experience as
a momentary release from the prison of the ordinary
personality and its built-in conflicts, we may speak
of    value as that of giving the prisoner a taste of free-
      its
dom and    a perspective on life richer than that of
his lonely cell. Such an experience will contribute to
his permanent liberation by reinforcing his incentive,
shattering his idealizations of prison life, giving him
valuable orientation and information from outside
sources as to what to do to gain his freedom. Much
of this depends on the prisoner's activity while the
door of his        remains temporarily unlocked. He
                       cell
may, in one                 push the door open, being
                      case, not even
too sleepy or scared of life beyond the walls within,
which he has become accustomed to living. Or he may
walk out to get some food from a neighboring room,
or just go for a walk and enjoy the landscape. Alter-
natively, he may be concerned above all else with
using his time to secure his permanent freedom. He
may find help, or instruments, to bring in and remove
the bars when he finds himself locked in again, or he
may busy himself with making a duplicate key for the
lock.
   In other terms, we may understand the artificial
ecstasy as a state that is made possible by the transient
removal of obstructions to the flow of a person's deeper
psychic life and his experience of reality. Such removal
of obstructions may be compared to the anaesthesia of
higher cortical control elicited by alcohol, NO2, lack of
oxygen, and so on, resultmg in disinhibition of impulse
or affect. Yet, if this neurophysiological model is cor-
rect, the site of action of the drugs dealt with in this
book must be            different from that of depressants, for
it   is   a   different quality of disinhibition that takes place.
      Yet      this   experience of freedom from habitual ob-
structions in awareness and action is only a preview
of dysfunctional patterns within the personality. Though
both may be experientially the same, in one case we
are facing a conditional freedom, and in the other, a
freedom in wholeness, which is a freedom in spite of
difl&culties. Going back to the prison analogy, it is as
    8

1                      The Healing Journey
if, in the former case, the guard has just been put to