What I originally mentioned hardly expresses
  what I have later come to feel about this picture.
  The Englishman who is taking a world tour is not
  riding; he is so foolish as to pull the camel along
  because he is impatient. The Englishman is me.
  He is very "hawk-nosed," and this is much em-
  phasized. Actually I think of EngUshmen as being       ^


  fools who would go on playing cricket while their
  world falls apart and who play games with no one
  but themselves. The camel is the part of me that
  can carry me there. It represents all the wisdom
  of the East. The idea of die self, the kingdom of
  God within, is familiar to me. In my daily life, I
  do not seem to believe this; I do not feel it within
  or project it without ... As for my thoughts
  about the camel, I feel that in this Ufetime I am
  not going to allow myself to ride him and take
  me on the journey. I do not act as though there
  were a self to carry; evidence of inner spontaneity
  is very faint. Depending on others to run things,
  however, is becoming more intolerable to me.

   The therapeutic implication of such readiness to
read into the symbolism of the reverie is obvious. And
since this is frequently of spontaneous occurrence, it
  ay be mentioned as a cognitive aspect in the descrip-
tion of the   MMDA    experience. It might be suspected
1 08             The Healing Journey
that  it is precisely this proximity between visual and

conceptual understanding that accounts for the tenden-
cy of some individuals to prevent aspects of their inner
life from becoming expressed in conscious images.
   In dealing with imagery at the time of the session
proper, the aim should be, as with psychosomatic
symptoms, that of contacting the experience which is
dormant in the visual symbols. Mere contemplation of
the latter may not be suflBcient to this end; on the
other hand, identification with the characters or ob-
jects in the fantasy may lead the patient to undo a
projection and recognize a hitherto unacknowledged
part of himself. This was the case of a woman, for
instance, felt disgust at the sight of a ridiculous clown,
but who, when attempting to identify with such a
character, suddenly yelled in panic, for she felt like
a httle baby tossed in the air. Then she realized that
she had been played with like a doll; she had actually
adopted this role and played the clown all her life to
please others. Yet all along, in the process of this
"show," she was suffering from postponement of her
real urges and feeling the loneliness ijnpUed in the
assimiption that nobody would want her except as an
object of amusement.
   This sequence of events shows that the facilitating
effect ofMMDA     on the therapeutic procedure lies not
only in the presentation of a significant clue (image of
the clown) to the patient's conflict ("playing" the
clown vs. wanting to be loved as she is). Once the
button of the significant symbol was pressed, her ex-
perience changed in quaUty: The patient's emotion was
released, and she switched from a visual type of re-
action to one of the feeling-enhancement type (being
tossed in the air, treated as an object). As a conse-
quence of attending to the unpleasant feeling of being
treated as an object, insist ensued: She was treating
herself as an object, in presenting herself to others as
such. Lastly, a new feeling came to the fore: She did
not waru to treat herself like this; what she wanted
was  love. It is significant that, for several days after
the session, she felt an intense desire for food, which
ended abruptly at a later appointment, during which
                 MMDA and the Eternal Now                109

she    came  to accept her desire for love more fully.
The entire process may be seen like a rising from the
feelingless type 3       MMDA  reaction, though the latter
was   achieved  after the end  of the session.
   The condensed illustration above may give an over-
simplified view of what form the therapist's interven-
tion can take in the process of leading the patient to
the desymbolization of the experience embodied in
visual terms. An image may have to be brought to
mind again and again, its transformations followed,
and attention directed to the patient's feelings, while
watching or identifying with objects or persons in the
scene, interpretations given at this or that point, and
so on. The following passage, from the transcript of
 a tape recording, never led to the expected explosion
 of feelings, but illustrates in detail the exploration of
 an image and shows how much interpretation can be
 achieved by means of a non-interpretive approach:

   Doctor. Let us work on this image. Could you be
        this place into   which you enter?
   Patient.    Be   that place?
   Doctor. Yes, speak out of the experience of being
      the place.
   Patient. I have a problem here, because I don't
        know what   is in the center of it until I open it,
        so to find this place I have to be aware of
        what is inside of babies. Is that all right? Which
        one   shall I   do?
      Doctor. Either.
      Patient. OK. I'm this place, and there is this baby
         inside, and I'm waiting for someone to come
         and open the door and take it out. And somehow
         I'm trying to watch. I want to know what is
         inside, somehow. I'm being curious about it.
      Doctor. Can you say how you are? Could you
        describe yourself?
      Patient. I can't do it too well, but there is a part
        of me that is looking outside. Outside of me
        there is light, a bright light, a beautiful outside
        world, and I am kind of a shield that doesn't
        let this outside penetrate to the inside. The
110                        The Healing Journey
      insideis amorphous, black, neuter, nothing
     about sense, but the sense of being shut of,
    kind of stopped, waiting for someone to pick
    up this baby and bring it out, and in a way
    my task seems to be to shield the baby from
    the outside, keep it in cold storage, almost.
  Doctor. Keep it in cold storage. Can you sense
      this part of yourself, this protective function?
  Patient.     You mean               in   my     normal          self,   or right
      now?
  Doctor. No, in your        life, in your everyday sell

      Do      you see yourself as shielding a very pre-
      cious part?
  Patient. That's very interesting.My tendency oh,
                                                              —                —
     I'm getting quite a bit, I think ^my conscious
     tendency as soon as I realize how to get it
     will be to go in and pick it up and get it out
     real fast, probably faster than I should.
  Doctor. The same thing! "Probably faster than I
     should"      .the fear of
                      .   .                   .   .   .


  Patient. I want it to be that I get it out right
     away. I force it.
  Doctor. So there seems to be a conflict here for
     you between the tendency to overshield and
     really remove this core of Ufe from life, keep
     it in storage, and the opposite tendency and

      over-tendency to take it out fast into life.
  Patient.   Now I think what's happening is that,
      consciously, I'm doing it much too fast, so it's
      blocked to my conscious mind so I can't get
      to it any faster than I'm supposed to. So, un-
      consciously, I have to go to tiie other extreme,
      to keep  it shut. There is one interesting thing

      which may help. In meditation and other ex-
      periences, whenever anything interesting starts
      happening, I have to grab it spontaneously and
      put it down. So I don't let myself. I pull myself
      out of it, as soon as an image ... I had this
      experience before, so this                          may     just    indicate
      that.
  Doctor.      Which          is,   in a   way, shielding the experi-
      ence,    and        in another       way        it is   taking      it   out.
                   MMDA and the Eternal Now           111

Patient. I try to takeit out, so I lose it. Yes, wow!