At this point the patient had the insight that turned
the session into a success. Being able now to switch
from the position of victim to that of "squeezer," she
could see that the force causing her pains was none
other than greed for all and everything, a rapacious,
clutching infant that could never be satisfied. Imme-
diately after this, she spontaneously understood and
was exhilarated at the discovery of the perversion
involved in the turning back of desire upon herself
in a relentless squeeze. Meister Eckhardt says that
all our desires are ultimately the desire for God.
Many would          perhaps choose another word and speak
of a       urge, the absolute. Good, a longing for the
        life
ideal state, Eros; yet all these conceptions imply the
recognition of a unity beyond the apparent multiphcity
of human wants.              A
                      given desire can be understood as
the expression of an imphcit behef that the attain-
ment of such specific goals will bring about happiness.
Of course, this is not the way it works, but implicit
or unconscious behefs cannot be altered by reasoning
(or even experience). Thus most thieves get little
satisfaction    from             their       stealing,            moneymakers from
their riches, or compulsive scholars from their leam-
jing.   Whenever the therapeutic process leads to an
lunderstanding of the urge, the subject attains some
[freedom from that particular need, since it is now
 mderstood as merely a means to an end and often                        —
|a roundabout or inadequate one. So when the thief
 mderstands, not with the mind but with his feelings,
  is need to have something from others, he may begin
104               The Healing Journey
to    ask for love,   and when the neurotic   intellectual
acknowledges his need for recognition, he may become
less attached to the prestige game, since its value now
does not appear to him as something intrinsic to the
accumulation of knowledge.
   I beUeve that an experience such as the one quoted
above, leading to the reaUzation of a "Ufe force," is
one step beyond all this, in that it leads to a realiza-
tion of unity beyond rather limited needs, such as sex,
ambition, greed, and protection. This is the domain
of experience which interests the mystic, even though
in the present quotation there is no usage of reUgious
or mystical terms. And it is the domain that Jung
regards as archetypal, beyond personal differentiation,
even though its presentation in the case report is not
essentially mediated by images.




        ACTIVE PARTICIPATION AT NEUTRAL POINTS

One might understand     the different types of reaction
to   MMDA    as different pointson a gradient of aware-
ness   and openness. An increase in awareness may
transform the psychosomatic type of experience into
one of the feeUng type; and the latter, through under-
standing of resistance, may give way to the integra-
tive peak experience.    K we go to the other extreme,
we find reactions in which the patient has less and less
to report. Even physical sensations seem to be blurred
in a state of restricted awareness, most probably of a
defensive nature, which may culminate in drowsiness
or sleep. It would seem that this state of calm con-
stitutes a manifestation at another level of that calm
or serenity which is characteristic of the peak experi-
ence with   MMDA.    One is a calm in richness, a still-
ness in the midst of inner movement, the other, a
state of calm where little happens, a placid bluntness.
   As we approach the unconscious end of the scale,
where passivity takes the form of somnolence, the
subject even becomes unaware of his dreamlike imag-
                  MMDA and the Eternal Now                        105

 ery.   When    questioned, he    may be   able to report an
isolated scene that he is visualizing at the moment,
but he is unable to remember the previous one. Or
possibly he knows that his mind is active but cannot
grasp  tiie content of his thought or imagination. For-
tunately, this is the case in only about 25 per cent
of all instances.
   Whenever the effect of         MMDA
                                     is not remarkably
productive in terms of either positive or negative feel-
ings, a very active participation by the therapist may
be required in order to deal with the patient's somatic
sensations, imagery, or actual behavior.
   Feelings may thus be brought into conscious focus
by attending to the outer symbolic or physical ex-
pressions and the unfolding of experience or behavior,
as is the practice in Gestalt therapy.
   Take, for instance, the following illustration:

     Doctor. Are you aware of your tight jaw?
       (Patient nods affirmatively and intensifies the
       contraction of her chewing muscles.)
     Doctor. Intensify that.
       (Patient begins to grind her teeth.)
     Doctor, (after a few minutes) Intensify that.
       (The grinding of teeth now gradually becomes
        a locked jaw once more while the patient, who
                  raises her head, opens her eyes in a
        is sitting,

       fierce stare, and breathes deeply.)
     Patient. I feel strong. Not tense anymore,             but
        severe, masterful.
     Doctor. "Stay with it.''
     Patient. (She gradually relaxes and begins to
       swallow saliva.) My chewing has become swal-
        lowing. Now that I have found my strength, I
        don't have to knock angrily at the door to get
        satisfaction, but I   can simply give   it   to myself.

   Another patient felt very sleepy and relaxed, but
Itended to stretch his toes. He was encouraged to at-
Itempt to give in alternately to his desire to rest and
Ihis desire to stretch,
                      and soon he realized the bearing
of   those opposed tendencies on his whole present life.
1   06           The Healing Journey
He perceived the tension in his toes as an urge for
excitement, an expression of boredom and dissatisfac-
tion with his passivity, whereas the latter he under-
stood with a resigned withdrawal from conflict. With
this awareness, his need for excitement became stron-
ger than his need for withdrawal, and this is what led
him to engage in additional psychotherapy after his
MMDA     treatment.
   Whenever not only feeling but physical sensations
or the desire to communicate is sli^t, this may be an
appropriate occasion to deal with a dream. As men-
tioned earlier, because of the increased faculty for
creating imagery under   MMDA,   it may be easy to re-

experience dreams, whereas an increased insight into
symbolic or metaphoric forms is favorable to the un-
folding of their meanings.




                              IMAGERY AND DREAMS

When   imagery, rather than psychosomatic manifesta-
tions,dominates in the picture of symptoms elicited by
MMDA, it is the content of such images which may
be regarded as "the royal road to the unconscious.
Indeed, such cues, like fertile seeds, may develop from
within and reveal some of their meaning, if only at-
tention is given to them. The first task of the therapist
will usually be that of helping the patient to direct
his attention to the unfolding sequence of scenes, so
he can become aware of and remember their detail.
The following example is from the session of a forty-
seven-year-old man who lay most of the time witii his
eyes closed, feeling pleasantly relaxed, and who prob-
ably retained very little of what he saw. When ques-
tioned at one point, he described a scene that is one
of three that he could remember after the session was
over. This is how he described the image on the fol-
lowing day:

       One picture that came to me was about a
     camel being led by a lean, angular, Sherlock
              MMDA and the Eternal Now              107

  Holmes type    of Englishman. They were on a
  tour. I don't know why the Englishman was
  leading the camel. It had no pack on its back.
  Possibly the Englishman was too impatient and
  felt he had to drag the camel in order to get there
         My
   at all.   body goes slowly, has to, and much of
  the work I do seems to have to be done in spells,
  with much resting in between times.

  What the patient said nine days later, writing about
the session, shows how the number and significance of
associations between the symbol and his personality
were increased after a period of spontaneous elabora-
tion: