than a change in the    style of mental operation and
               MDA, the Drug of Analysis                 25
reactions, in that   it   entails theremembering of par-
ticular events. This   may occasionally be brought about
under the eflEect of other hallucinogens or wiSiout any
drug, particularly when sought after throu^ therapeu-
tic maneuvers. Ibogaine, in particular, lends itself well
to an exploration of events in a patient's life history
for the richness of feeling with which these can be
evolved. Yet with    MDA   regression occurs so frequently
and spontaneously that this can be considered a typic^
effect of this substance, and a primal source of its
therapeutic value.
   I believe that case reports rather than generaliza-
tions convey the subtle understanding of a drug's effect
that is needed for its utilization in psychiatry. It is from
such that I have learned whatever I may have to say,
and I think that I can say it best by recording some
of the events I have witnessed as a psychotherapist,
obscure as these may at times be. In what follows I
shall summarize the essentials of some instances of
MDA     therapy chosen as the most effective in bringmg
about changes in the patient's personality. As it will
be seen, all of these entailed a dawning of new insight
by the patient into his own life history or some aspect
of it. In this, the healing process differed from what is
observed in most instances of harmaline,      MMDA,       or
even ibogaine therapy.
   The first case presented here is actually the first in
which I used  MDA     for a therapeutic purpose. The pa-
tient is an engineer in a high management post and a
professor of business administration who had studied
psychology for professional reasons and, in so doing,
                                        —
come to realize that life in general and his in par-
ticular—could develop, and become richer and deeper.
When questioned on his reasons for wanting psycho-
therapy, he emphasized a feeling of not having devel-
oped or achieved what was in his potential to develop,
his life being limited in scope: "Both my professional
 and love life have been controlled by accident. I have
had little influence on the course of my life." This he
 attributed to his insecurity, which manifested itself in
doubt of his judgment and actions, which in turn left
him at the mercy of external pressures. "This may be
26                     The Healing Journey
                 who live with me, but I am not sat-
pleasant for those
        need more direction on my life, and for this
isfied. I
I need to be more unyielding." His insecurity, too,
made him vulnerable, so that he was sometimes hurt
by   little   things   —
                       ^mostly criticism   from his wife. He felt
little   affection or regard for her,      and had considered a
divorce, but felt too attached to his children to leave
the house. To the question of what he would want
to obtain through psychiatric help he replied: "I want
to know where to go in view of what I have. I want to
be better, useful, and achieve new happiness. In the
most intimate part of myself I have always been un-
satisfied. I want to be sure of my worth. That is my
greatest problem, which prevents me from deciding and
takes away the direction from my life. And I want to
understand how this state came about."
   I proposed to the patient a treatment which would
entail a preparatory period of approximately two
months with weekly appointments (during which he
would write an autobiography), which would be fol-
lowed by a day-long         MDA
                             session and group therapy
thereafter. TTie autobiographic account that he wrote
was  quite careful, and it is interesting to contrast some
of its views with those at the time of the         MDA
                                                    session
or later. I shall quote isolated fragments. Of his parents
he says:
   "My mother was a sensitive, hardworking woman
with a lively mterest in thmgs. She had a deep love for
her family, which translated itself into a constant de-
sire for progress and weU-being for all of us. She was
always investing effort to this end. I loved her deeply.
   "My father was a tough, good, honest man. Sure of
himself, generous at times and selfish at others.              A
hard worker, raised in the constraint and discipline of
a Spanish village. His life was guided by some simple
rules of conduct and certain ethical principles that are
broad and true."
   The first childhood memory which he describes is
a dining room:
   "I lived in a house with adequate comfort. What I
remember best is the dining room. This was large,
rather elegant or at least that of a prosperous bour-
               MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis          27
geois. Very pleasant. It had a hanging buzzer, a highly
polished mahogany table, a cupboard with glass doors
full of lovely cups.
  "During meals I remember that my greatest problem
was French bread, which, having holes, could have
worms inside and was therefore not good to eat. With
regard to the people, I remember my mother, vaguely,
some maids, some uncles, my paternal grandfather.
For all of them I was a good boy, and it seems that
they pampered me a lot, since I was practically an
only child for a long time."
   He ends the story of his childhood with the follow-
ing paragraph:
   "It seems that I had a wet nurse in this house, for
they say my mother did not have milk. I remember
this nurse most clearly at a later stage in life."
   Of the period between this and the beginning of
school he remembers financial difl&culties at home, his
great sadness about dropping a necklace of his mother's
in the fireplace, watching a maid having sexual inter-
course, speculating on female genitals and pregnancy,
and the birth of his brother when he was six. Of the
whole period he says: "I was just one more poor boy,"
which is in contrast to his pleasant memories of his
first year in an American school, and the following in
an English school, in both of which he felt appreciated
by the teachers and enjoyed playing with his classmates.
   Out of the twenty pages of his biography he devotes
only five to his life before school, but these proved to
contain what is most relevant to the events during the
MDA     session. The rest of his writing deals mainly
with school and work, and only briefly mentions the
death of his mother, when he was in the first year of
the university and his rather loveless love affair, end-
ing in marriage. Several events point to a lifelong feel-
ing of shyness and prohibition in face of women and
sex, which he is well aware of, and he ends the story
of his life by poiating at his insecurity and underesti-
mation of himself and his family, which, he believes,
originated between the time of his fixst memories and
school, but he doesn't know how.
    One and a half hours after the ingestion of 120 mg.
28               The Healing Journey
of   MDA,  the patient felt normal except for an exceed-
ingly brief change in visual perception at the end of
the first hour, when the shape of a hill in front of the
house resembled to him that of a lion. Aside from this
phenomenon, lasting not more than ten seconds and
which would seem a rather normal fantasy (though
he perceived it as unusual), he evidenced no further
symptoms of bdng under the influence of a drug. The
situation persisted after the intake of an additional
100 mg. of the chemical and another hour and a half
of waiting, so I interpreted this to be a case of sub-
jective resistance to the impending experience rather
than physiological insusceptibility.
   It was my own fantasy that tide patient kept a very
formal fron^ while another part of him was having the
"drug experience" without "his" even knowing it. The
verbal kind of communication that we were having did
not seem to put him in touch with his ongoing experi-
ence at the moment, so I turned to the non-verbal level.
I asked him to let his body do whatever it wanted
most at the moment, without questioning it, and he
went back to the couch which he had left minutes be-
fore.
   He reported a slig}it feeling of wdght on his body,
a desire to lie down with all bis weight and let his ex-
halation be more complete. I asked him to give in to
this desire and purposely exhale with force at each
breath. As he did this more and more forcefully, he
felt first the need to contract his abdominal muscles,
later his whole body, flexing his 1^   and thi^, spine,
arms, and head. I kept coadiing hun into carrying this
impulse to the extreme, until, about three minutes later,
rolled into a fetal position, he exploded into laughter.
The "drug session" proper suddenly began. Though
his English was far from fiurat, and I had not heard him
speak it before, it was in English that he now spoke,
as he laughed and expressed delist at feelmg himself
all over. Even on the following day, he spoke English
while describing the experience:
   "I was strictly myself. It's very funny that I wanted
to speak English, and I was laughing at the man, the
man that I was. In that man that I felt was laughmg
                         MDA, the Drug of Analysis                           29
was another fellow. It was deep, deep, deep inside of
me, when I was ... my real self."
  I am transcribing from a tape recording, and the
faulty English leaves room for                  some     ambiguity, yet       it