ba^ full of water.
   He was first instructed to look at the dream scene
as a picture of his existence, regarding himself as the
shrimp. He said, "This is my existence. I am a shrimp
in a plastic bag. I am stapled. I can't move. And I
have no head."
   This made sense to him, since there was a sense of
bein^ immobilized in his life. At the suggestion that he
describe the experience of being a shrimp, he now
realizes that not only is he enclosed by the bag but
by the shell that covers his body. He reacts to this
by wanting to be free and have direct contact with
the environment, and realizes that this   is   a true though
unexpressed urge in him.
  But then, when asked to enact the          he realizes
                                          shell,
that this is also part of himself, since he wants to
protect himself. As he pursues the enactment of the
dream elements, it turns out that all these are engaged
in mutual antagonism, but after the various "voices''
talk with one another, a sense of unity develops.
   Thus the subject as shrimp does not feel encased in
his shell, butendowed with it for his own purposes;
the shell does not insist any more on protecting the
shrimp beyond its interest, but wants to serve as his
               MMDA and the Eternal Now                   115

instrument; shrimp and water enjoy each other, and
they all feel protected in the bag.
  A   new element of the dream is now recalled by the
patient. It is from his mother's hand that the plastic
bag is hanging, with all that there is in it. Shell, bag,
and mother appear now as progressively explicit pre-
sentations of a function of himself, which both protects
him and restrains him. I now ask him to enact the
shrimp talking to his mother. At first, he wants to
say, "Let me out, let me free," but cannot be heard
from inside the bag. He cannot reach her, feels too
distant and isolated, in the same manner that he does
in real hfe. He now realizes he cannot communicate
intimately with his mother.
   I then ask him to take a step out of the dream and
imagine his mother sitting in front of him and tell her
of his feelings of constraint or imprisonment. The out-
come of the encounter is a long episode which he
retrospectively   summed up   as follows:

    I couldn't, i couldn't. I knew I had to really
  get angry at her, to hit her. I remember now the
  firsttime I saw her. I had set her up on the floor.
  She was just about two feet tall, and I felt like
  smashing her to pieces with a club. I reaUy wanted
  to so much, but again I couldn't. Finally, she just
  sort of fell to pieces. I hoped for a second that
  this meant that she was gone for good, but I soon
  found out that she was still with me. I guess she
  won't ever go away until I knock her away, get
  really angry, cry, etcetera. When that day comes,
  I believe I will be totally free from her.


  He was not able to go beyond the impasse, but he
could now understand how his unfulfilled feeling was
not mere inertia, but a silent struggle between rage
and   guilt.
  We    worked on the dream scene           for    about four
more   hours, in the course of which        he was able    to
understand the image of the staple. It      represented bit-
ing, childishly vindictive rage turned      against himself.
But after a period of contemplating         this   "Baby-me"
116                   The Healing Journey
attitude, his closed-oflf,      clinging, biting hardness gave
way   —now he       wanted to be tucked up (folded anc
                    just
put away) and dropped in the corner of the bag. Ir
other words, the hostility of the staple, which was
mitially directed to a possessive and hardheaded "bit-j
ing" at the shrimp, came to be felt by the patient asl
a misdirected desire to hold on, to have contact, to bel
not alone. And he now saw that the baby in him that|
wanted to be loved did not need to go about it ag-
gressively, but that, on the contrary, he could achieve|
much more by just enjoying his surroundings.
    As to the bag, it was she "who is in charge," who I
wanted the status quo. Everyone else has other things                   [
he (or she) wants to do. Shrimp wants to go back to
the sea and live free, with his head back on; water
wants to evaporate; and staple wants to find his place,
too. Only the bag wants to keep things the way they
 are
      —"she feels fuU and warm with water, shrimp and
 shell and staple all inside her." The end result of the
session for this young man was insight into his inner
world to an unknown and surprising degree.
    He started out his report on the following day with
the assertion, "I      now     really   know how       I see myself.'
And now,         after eight   months, he   still    explains that he
is   different   from before, "in that now          I see myself, un-
derstand myself." He values this understanding to such
an extent that he has decided to study psychology.

The reading  of the case illustrations presented on the
foregoing pages may well seem, on the whole, not very
different from a collection of accounts taken from
ordinary psychotherapeutic sessions not involving the
use of a drug. Most of the reactions to             mayMMDA
be understood as an intensification of feelings, symp-
toms, and visual imagination rather than a qualitative
change thereof. The value of such an intensification
in the psychotherapeutic process lies mainly, perhaps,
in that clues to the significant issues take more fre-
quently the therapist's or patient's attention than they
otherwise would, whereas, in the normal situation,
much of the time and effort in a therapeutic process
may go into cutting through a veil of verbiage and
               MMDA and the Eternal Now               1   17

automatisms that form part of the habitual social    role.
With MMDA, there         a more prompt access to the
                        is

patient's underlying experience, or symptoms resulting
from its denial and distortion.
  Another aspect of the effects of       MMDA   that con-
tributes to the greater density of the therapeutic inter-
action, if not to its qualitative change, is that, without
loss of the reflective disposition, thinking takes   on a
more    experiential quality than  ordinarily would. In-
                                    it

stead of being purely conceptual and verbal, the think-
ing that characterizes the MMDA-elicited state seems
linked to visual images, sensory data, and emotional
experience, so that an abstract statement tends to bring
about in the person's mind concrete instances of its
application,   and insight tends to be a complete,   feel-
ing-intellectual process rather than conceptual realiza-
tion.
   The value of visual fantasy in psychotherapy is an-
other instance of this experiential thinking, bound to
images and not divorced from feelings. Though some
persons have a natural facility for summoning up vi-
sual images, and others may acquire it through train-
ing, the facilitation that   MMDA  can effect in active
imagination must be Usted in this final summary of its
usefulness as an adjunct to psychotherapy.
   Last but not least, the value of      MMDA lies in its
potential to bring about peak experiences which may
occur either spontaneously or as a consequence of
therapeutic work, and which may last seconds or
hours. In such moments of serenity and love, a person
may experience his reaUty from a different point of
view and thus learn to let go of his habitual attitudes.
The bearing of such peak experiences on the doctor-
patient encounter may be that of a step toward learn-
ing to relate in the Now, a present free from trans-
ferrential bondage to past conditions and stereotyped
mechanisms.
                                          CHAPTER IV

                                  HARMALINEAND
                                  THE COLLECTIVE
                                     UNCONSCIOUS