true. Can it be true? What do you think. Doctor, can
this be true?"
   Long sequences of this nature took place between
successive steps in understanding or remembering, and,
as I have mentioned before, the days following the
session were followed by intensive questioning of the
same type.
   Soon after working with this patient, I left the
coimtry for two months and expected to see him again
upon returning, but he now felt that the help received
in the meantime from a fellow therapist of mine was
all that he needed and that he would rather concen-
trate on the spiritual quest as before. I have met him
accidentally on occasion since, and it is my intuition
from the quality of this contact that the process in-
itiated on die day of the session was never completed.
Even so, the treatment was effective in affording the
patient the symptomatic reUef that he sought, in giving
him greater self-reliance (which made his relationship
with others more satisfactory), and in bringing about
greater spontaneity in his life.
   This patient's hesitancy in accepting the truth of the
events recalled while under the influence of the drug
illustrates a reaction frequentiy observed in the period
following a therapy session. It would seem that re-
pressed memories can be accepted only when a parallel
change in the patient's attitudes to or interpretation of
them takes place, in such a way that they are no longer
50               The Healing Journey
threatening to his present "balance." In truth, the un-
plicit fear  of change that makes a patient ward off
certain events or experiences is an intimation of a
secret recognition of the instability of his present situ-
ation. Like the fear of high places in those who un-
conciously want to fall, the fear to remember bespeaks
a wish of the organism to fall back into the truth, a
hidden desire to see.
   It would seem that  MDA    may be instrumental in in-
ducing a state where nothing is threatenitig, and where
the person can unconditionally accept his experiences,
for his security lies elsewhere than in an image of
himself. After such a phase is over, the information
in the person's subconsciousness may clash with his
current views, or elicit reactions (like condemnation
of a parent) that he cannot allow himself. The result
may then be anxiety or horror at the events remem-
bered, denial of their reality, or anmesia with regard
to the whole episode. For change to occur, time has to
be allowed, so that the gap between the reaction to the
critical event   and the patient's personality struc-
ture can be bridged, as was successfully achieved
within twenty-four hours by the subject of our first
illustration. When assimilation of the critical event is
insuflScient during a session, the process may continue
for the following day or month or be resumed in a
subsequent session with the drug.
   The following case is particularly illustrative of the
operation of defenses after successive    MDA    sessions
and shows how in each one of them the patient was
able to see more of his past and also integrate more
into his post-session awareness. The patient is a thirty-
year-old stutterer who had been in psychotherapy for
two years and who had experienced considerable im-
provement in his symptoms. He was referred to me by
his therapist because she felt that the lack of emotion-
al contact in the present therapeutic relationship was
precluding further progress, and she hoped that a
drug could help the patient in dropping his over-
intellectualized and normative approach in the thera-
peutic encounter.
   When questioned as to his own interest in further
                                                              1




                  MDA   ,   the   Drug of A nalysis       5

therapy, the patient explained that stuttering was no
longer his main concern, but irritability at home, an
absence of feelings, and a lack of contact with things
in general. "I feel that I don't touch the ground while
I walk, but float above it; I don't feel fully in touch
with anything." He often used impersonal phrasings at
the first interview (i.e., "There w tension in my arms"),
and when I called this to his attention, he explained:
 'This is my essential concern: I want to be able to
speak in the first person!"
   One of several phychological tests used prior to the
treatment proper was the HPT,^ consistmg of a series
of human photographs to which the subject is invited
to respond in terms of what he likes or dislikes in
them. The most remarkable feature of his responses
was the rejection of many faces which he perceived
as criminal. He related this feature in his reactions to
his own unconscious perception of himself as a de-
linquent, as evidenced in dreams in which he was
persecuted by the poUce.
   The most salient datum in the patient's history, as
remembered by him before the treatment, was that his
stammering began at the time of his first year in
school, of which he recalled very littie. He had very
                                                      —
few memories prior to this time in his life ^his mother
going to the clmic to have his younger brother, himself
naked for a sunbath and hiding from a new maid,
his parents buying him a gift. Of the next school he
remembered vividly a blond little girl that loaned him
a pencil. He said that throughout his childhood he
used to lock himself in his father's closet and secretly
give in to fits of rage and crying until he could not
stand the heat any longer. He described the relation-
ship to his parents as normal and uneventful and said
that he used to tell his mother everything until he was
twelve or thirteen, when he changed in this respect,
and she complained of his loss of confidence in her.
At  school, he was a rather good student, but avoided
sports. Since the age of fourteen, he had taken an
active part in different Catholic youth organizations,