has an empty stomach, and not to use more than 4
mg. per kilogram of body weight on a first session,
I find that the optimal dosage may range from 3 to
5 mg. per kilogram, depending on the individual's sen-
sitivity to the drug. 2 Dramamine may also be used as
a preventive for vomiting, either in a first session or
thereafter, if the subject is already known to react

with vomiting.
     Acomfortable couch or bed must be considered part
of the setting for the treatment, for most patients want
to lie down during the first few hours, or even through-
out most of their session, and feel nauseated when they
get up or move. However, others feel the desire to
move or even dance at some point in the session (35
   2 With such dosages taken orally in a gelatin capsule, the
symptoms become manifest about forty-five to sixty minutes
after ingestion. These may extend from eight to twelve hours,
and some patients have reported subjective after-effects even
twenty-four (20 per cent), thirty-six (15 per cent), or more
(5 per cent) hours later. Yet even in such instances, the patient
is   usually able to function normally after six to eight hours
from the beginning of the effects. In the majority of instances,
I have ended the therapeutic session in seven hours or less,
leaving the patient in congenial company.
               Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality                 173

per cent in   my   data), and this   may prove      a very   sig-
nificant aspect of their experience   —   as will   be elabor-
rated upon later. For this reason, some degree of space
to move about is desirable.
   Proceeding to the subjective domain, one finds some
^milarity  b^een        the content of experiences elicited
with ibogaine and      those  typical of harmaline, although
it is in  this sphere,  too, that  the specificity of each be-
comes most noticeable. In broad terms, it can be said
that archetypal contents and animals are prominent
among the visions produced by both, and the actions
involved in the plot of dreamlike sequences frequently
involve destruction or sexuality.
   In spite of the similarity pointed out between ibogaine
and harmaHne, there are specificities of tiie former that
give it a place of its own in psychotherapy. Ibogaine
elicits a less purely visual-symbolic experience than
harmaline. With no drug have I witnessed such fre-
quent explosions of rage as with this particular one.
Aggressicm is a frequent theme in harmaline experi-
ences, but there it is portrayed only in visual symbols.
TMA, which has been reported to release hostility, is
in my experience characterized by a delusional state
where hostility is expressed more as paranoid thoughts
than as actual feeling. With ibogaine, anger is not
directed (I would say transferred, in ttie psychoana-
lytic sense) to the present situation but, rather, to
persons or situations in the patient's past, toward whom
and by which it was originally aroused. This is in
accord with tiie general tendency for the person under
ibogaine to become concerned with childhood remini-
scences and fantasies.
   The salience of animals, primitiyes, sexual themes,
and aggression in ibogaine and harmaline experiences
would justify regarding them as drugs that bring out
the instinctual side of the psyche. This stressing of
man-the^animal contrasts widi the effect of the airy or
ethereal "psychedelics," which bring out man-the-god
or man-tiie-<levil, and with man-centered drugs like
MDA      orMMDA,        which lead the person to focus on
his individuality and relationship with pthers.
   Aside from differences in the quality of the ibogaine
174                 The Healing Journey
experience, there are differences in content: a less
purely archetypal content, more childhood imagery, and
certain themes that appear to be specific to the mental
state evoked by the alkaloid       —^notably fantasies of
fountains, tubes, and marshy creatures. The reader
will appreciate this specificity throughout the clinical
illustrations on the following pages.
   The first case report that I am presenting consists of
the description of a complete sesaon. The variety
of episodes in it may serve as a condensed panorama of
the drug's possible types of effects and lead us to
a consideration of how these may be pertinent to psy-
chotherapy.
   The subject of this illustration is a physician in psy-
chiatric training whose interest in a therapeutic en-
counter arose out of a sense of lack of contact with
others and of not givmg his whole being to his love
life, his work, or his (k^ings in general. "I feel that
much in me is automatic and that what I do is worth-
less," he said. "I would like my contact with others
to be more from center to center.'*
   In preparation for the session with ibogaine, he had
undergone four Gest^dt therapy sessions and complied
with tiie request for a written autobiography. Forty-
five minutes after the ingestion, he reported a great
relaxation and a desire to lie down. He did so, folding
his arms and legs and closing his eyes, while he listened
to a record that he had brought with him. Every note
in the   music was dear and forceful in a way he had
never heard before.
  When he opened       his eyes,   he was surprised by the
beauty and richness in detail of objects in the room,
which he had not noticed before. Looking at photo-
graphs in the Family of Man book, which lay next to
tiie couch, he had insights both into the significance of
the scenes and into his own attitudes. After this, he
felt   like lying     again, and when he closed his
                    down
eyes he had a fantasy of his father making faces as if
in a game, with a contented smile. He commented that
this is how the expression of his father must have ap-
peared to him as a small boy. But then the expression
turned into a contortion of great rage. He visualized
              Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality          175

a naked woman with round hips hiding her face with
her arms, and then his father, dso naked, falling upon
her to penetrate her. He sensed controlled rage in the
woman, whom he now identified as his mother.
   I chose this sequence as a starting point for a the-
rapeutic procedure and asked the subject to have these
characters talks to each odier. This is a means of
bringing out the latent content of the images, so that
it becomes conscious and explicit. "What does she