taction occur leave me with little doubt as to its
>eing in the nature of a psychosomatic reaction. In
his particular instance, illustrative of many others, the
ethargic state seemed to be an active evasion of the
liscomfort accompanying the alternative state of atten-
ion to the ongoing process (a rich flow of imagery,
nemories, thoughts, and feelings) and communication.
SVhy this experience turned into one of discomfort is
126                   The Healing Journey
probably not the ri^ht question to ask. The pain o
self-confrontation may well be an individual constant
reflecting the person's present state. If this      is   so, the
question to ask the case under discussion is, How waj
the peak experience of the first minutes possible at all'
The reason, I believe, is the same as that which ao
counts for the possibility of peak experiences in dis-
turbed personalities in general: a realization is madt
possible by the temporary ignoring of its ultimate con
sequences; a state of being is grasped in abstractioi
 (not as a conceptual abstraction, but more like a feel-
ing abstraction), like the perfume of a rose withou
the sieht of it, or like a feeline state conveyed by i
work of art which may be identified with and enjoye<
by many who would not carry that feeling state intc
embodied expression as a style of Ufe.
   It may be a matter of speculation whether the pa-
tient's initial state of well-being might have persistec
had I not pressed him with questions. Apparently, my
question posed to him a challenge of consciousness thai
he could not meet, but it is conceivable that he might
have arrived at the corresponding answers himself ii
left to his spontaneous rhythm. The natural tendency
of most persons to withdraw from contact under the
influence of harmaline (the opposite of the typical
MDA      experience) may well be a constructive avoid-
ance, a fencing of the seedling while it attains matur-
ity, as discussed in more general terms in our intro-
ductory chapter. The metaphor used by Ramakrishna
to speak of meditation and the way of detachment
may be relevant to this point: Once butter has been
separated by churning the milk, it can be put into
the serum again or into water, and it will not dissolve.
   Whether I was adding water prematurely or not,
I do not know, but I am bringing up the issue because
it illustrates what I see as a permanent dilemma in the

guidance of harmaline sessions: the balance between
stimulation and non-interference.
   Little intervention may well leave a patient to his
own   inertia   and   result in   an unproductive session; on
the other hand, uncalled-for intervention may disrupt
the organic development which is characteristic of the
          Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious         127

more successful harmaline experiences. As a conse-
quence, more tact is needed in conducting these ses-
sions than with any other.
   The more successful experiences with harmaline
have a characteristic spontaneity, and these pose little
problem to the therapist. In contrast to experiences of
self-exploration at the interpersonal level, it is prob-
ably in the nature of an archetypal experience to de-
velop naturally from within, so that the most a per-
son's ego can do is stand by watchfully. Yet such
experiences of easy and spontaneous unfoldment of
images and psychological events occur only in about
every other person, so that it is the business of the
psychotherapist to induce them when they will not
naturally occur. To illustrate this, I am quoting some
notes taken from one of the less interesting sessions,
which is representative of many others in which the
subjects were left to follow their own course. In this
case, the subject was a rather conventional thirty-year-
old woman suffering from anxiety neurosis. The fol-
lowing fragment adequately represents the whole tran-
script, which is that of a monologue in which she re-
ports images succeeding each other with no clear logic
of transition:

      I see a white bird.
      Across.
      A   lamp with   violet teardrops
      I feel a ringing in   the ears.
                                         —
                                         glass.

  *

      I see    two crystal balls, like glittering lamps.
      I see   sand on a beach being tossed with shovels.
      I see a red rag^
      I seethe image of an old and ugjy man making
  globes with his mouth.
     Many lights are reflected, and then light and
  dark follow. Lights go on moving by in turquoise
  shades, green in the middle and turquoise all
  around.
      A black teardrop of a turning lamp.
     I see a radiant sun.
     I see the face of the beast in Beauty and the
  Beast.
                                                        —
1   28                   The Healing Journey
          A large black blot.
          A map. I first see America    and then Europe
     Italy.
          I see   some   stained glass windows.
          only see lights. I see glittering lights, many
          I
     lanterns in red-green-yellow colors.
          APersian carpet with a red background and
     shapes^

     Anyone acquainted with          the world of harmaline
would recognize here the          typical themes: the bird, as
the very first image; then the archetype of the cross,
with its religious connotation and its implied signifi-
cance of intersection, center, and outward extension
from it; the turning lamp, again conveying centrality;
the radiant sun, with its significance of source once
more, and stressing the element of light; the colors,
expressing li^ht once again. Yetj in spite of their po-
tential or hidden significance, the images followed each
other in this inward display, without revealing their
treasure, while the onlooker watched them go by with
little emotional participation other than curiosity.
    It is in cases like these that the therapist can some-
times step in and help the patient unlock the experi-
 ence hidden in the visual symbol, not so much through
 interpretations, which would interfere with the more
 important primary process, but through an encourage-
 ment of attention. Merely by more attention being
 given to these fleeting images, it may be discovered that
 they might start to unfold in a meaningful way; if only
 tiiey are "listened to," they may begin to "talk."
    The following excerpt is a literal transcript from
 part of a session, the first part of which had proceeded
 much like the one reported above. The passage quoted
 here is taken from a moment when the therapist chose
 to guide the process, and the fleeting and disjointed
 images then took the form of a continuous and co-
 herent sequence. The episode transcribed took place
 after the first thirty minutes of the session.


         Patient. I see a   woman   dressed in white with a
              bandana on her head. She's leaning against an
       Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious               129

  ivy-covered wall, and she is             looking at a statue,
  a golden statue of a lion.               Well, the statue is
  very close to her, on top of             a tall white granite
  obelisk, as phallic as the               Washington Mon-
  ument.
Doctor. What      is   the statue?
Patient.   What does       it    tell    me?
Doctor. No, what does            it    represent?
Patient.  The monument?             Fm standing
                                       Well, now
  at the  base of the monument and looking up at
  it. It's become a rocket.