pleasure I hit him! I screamed at him, too, scold-
  ing him and telling him that if he did not change I
  would rather not see him any more.
     What relief I felt after havmg shouted! I felt so
  ligjit afterward. I felt happy to know that I had
  the right to defend myself, for I had some worth
  of my own. I did not need to lean on somebody
  as I had done before. It had been horrible to
  crawl at the feet of tiie others. (I imitated this
  crawling with my hands.) I was no longer useless,
  I had such force, and life did not seem ridiculous
  to me any longer. It was a gift. (I thanked the
  doctor for having told me that before. He handed
               Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality             1 89

  me  a mirror.) I saw myself as very beautiful, so
  much of a child still. [She had earlier in the ses-
  sion seen herself as old and ugly.} I was a flower
  which had just opened to the world, with a radiant
  gaze and fresh skin. The disdainful line in my
  mouth had disappeared.       My body was agile, fuU
  of life. For the first time, I loved myself.

   It may be noticed that the terms in which she de-
scribes herself are very much the same as those she
had previously used in describing her self-image: beau-
tiful, young, fresh, full of life. But to see these qualities
in her very flesh or in the mirror took more than con-
templatmg   Aem   in her essential nature. This entailed
"coming out" into her body, becoming present in her
actions, and this meant having the coura^ to break
the bondage of the submissive personality pattern
which her body had been serving tfarougjiout her life.
   The change in her was obvious to her husband and
close acquaintances, and even after one year, a friend
of hers described her much in her own words: **Since
the treatment, she is like a flower open to the world."
In her marriage, she was patient while there was a need
for her to be so, until her husband's cure about a year
later. But now this was not the self-denying and com-
pulsive ^'patience" of non-communicating, but one
grounded on self-acceptance and understanding love.
   The three sessions illustrated thus far have in com-
mon what can be understood as an unusual and spon-
taneous expression of the person's "self," which takes
place in the form of actions, dance, feelings, percep-
tions, or judgments. In stating this, I am staying close
to the persons' descriptions of their experiences and
their own use of the word "self," rather than speculat-
ing on what this self (or the source of such am ex-
perience) might be. The subject of our first illustration
stressed that he was looking at pictures or at other
persons with his own eyes, and he realized tiiat it was
not himself that was present in his daily, automatic way
of perceiving things or using his body. Our second sub-
ject, too, was left with a taste of his own world and
 'the certainty that the whole world, of which I am a
1   90               The Healing Journey
spectator and a part,        is   experientially in myself,     and
is not something remote or m3rsterioiis." Lastly, the
woman in the third illustration also felt, as she saw
the beautiful girl dancing among the snowflakes, that
she was the image of her real s^; she wondered at
*the richness of life that there is in myself' and ended
                           —
up by loving herself ^not with what we usually caU
self-love, which means no more than living for a men-
tal audience   —
               but with warm appreciation for herself.
   In contrast to such experiences of relatively spon-
                                      —
taneous unfolding of the self ^that colter of gravity
in psychological functioning         where the individual      feels
complete, and his impulses are not in contradiction
                     —
with one another ^there is a greater number of sessions
in which the patienf s self-expression needs coaxing,
or in which self-expression is virtually impossible before
conflicting aspects of the personality are recondied.
   Two devices which I find useful as openings far
self-expr^sion (as well as starting points for more
elaborate procedures) are the presentation of poten-
tially significant photographs and the evocation of
dreams or creation of imaginary sequences. In both
situations, the potential of ibogaine is somewhat differ-
ent from that of other drugs. Under the effect of LSD-
like hallucinogens, photographs are either seen with
distortions that may point to the individual's projections,
or, in peak experiences, diey permit the translation of
the ongoing state of mind into a particular kind of re-
lationship with the person contemplated (e.g., "I could
see my mother's essence, for the first time, and love
her beyond her difl&cult personality. Just as she was
not responsible for her body, I saw that she was help-
less against   her   own   psychological make-up, which had
harmed me so much. But             this   was not   herself, really,