Here   is   more                      on the following
                     of his report writen
day: "I  felt like I    had another person inside or was
being another person     —
                        something I have never experi-
enced before. I felt free from my everyday 'I.' I saw
myself in a world of certainty, surprised at the ig-
norance in which I have lived with regard to what lies
in the depth of my being. It was a being connected
to my real self, like living in a different world in
which nothing was hidden and in which I went along
with great serenity."
   Three months later, he wrote:
   "There remains with me the image of a self of which
I had no notion and had never even imagined, with
more of these attributes which I considered desirable
and perfect, a tranquil self with its eyes turned to-
ward the world, with not the least worry about itself.
And with an old taste in me, not new, but deeply
united with my past and my true being.
   "At this very moment, in which I am away from
myself again, I can see as I walk along the street or
ride the bus how I am contained in a sort of shell,
blind to what is important, and yet I cannot escape
the feeling of   my   true being inside."
  I   had known                   only two weeks prior
                     this patient for
to this day. His therapist had told me of the dead end
to which his treatment had apparently come during the
past month and suggested him as a possible volunteer
for our research project.    My
                              knowledge of him was not
exceptional as compared to that of other candidates
whom I interviewed and tested during the days pre-
ceding their sessions.    My
                           rapport with the patient was
less than average. The patient was rather withdrawn
and seemed more interested in the exotic prospects
of a mind-changing drug than in a therapeutic ex-
change. The outcome was only moderate in terms of
immediate improvement, for, as the patient describes,
his novel feeling of his true self was still no remedy
for his estrangement from himself, but only a standard
of comparison between his actual state and his poten-
tial or ideal. The main result of this experience was a
change that was brought about in this patient's psy-
choanalytic treatment, which was never interrupted.
1   24           The Healing Joukney
His sense of authenticity and his enhanced awareness
of "distortion" or "lying" or "being contained in a
shell" now led to the establishment of a more pro-
ductive relationship with his therapist and provided
both with a goal to achieve in the treatment and a
challenge that gave meaning to the analytical process.
In other words, a "deficiency motivation" (becoming
free from his symptoms) became a self-actualization
motive. In psychotiierapy, as in alchemy, "one must
have gold to make gold," and in this case the session
gave Sie patient the initial "capital" required for the
work.
    The episode described in the foregoing pages took
place during a lapse of no more than thirty minutes
and ended when I started questioning him. Soon after
 he stated that everything in his life was a lie or a
distortion, I thought that it would be useful to him to
look more closely into the particulars of this distor-
tion, so that he could have something to remember
 after the session, something upon which he might an-
dior the otherwise vague sense of his reality. To my
question as to what in his life was a distortion, he
 answered, "Everything. Everything that I say or do.
Every gesture, the way I talk, the way I climb onto a
bus." And now he suddenly felt nauseated and restless.
As I continued to invite him to look into the concrete
instances of the lie, the distortion that he had dis-
covered, he felt increasing malaise, resented my speak-
ing to him, and said that my questions made him feel
more nauseated. Soon he started vomiting and spent
the next four to five hours alternating between periods
of vomiting and periods of sleeping. During this time,
he said that he was thinking or contemplating images,
but there was little that he could report, partiy because
of his inertia and his desire to withdraw from contact
and partly because he could not remember anything
that he did not mention as soon as he had experienced
it. When he did speak, though, either in answer to a

question or taking the initiative to talk, his physical
discomfort increased. The clearest of the images that
he did capture was very expressive of the world of
                               —
harmaline on its "hellish" side ^he was having a pic-
          Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious                     125

lie with his family and was sitting in a circle around

he fire where they were roasting ... his father.
   This session displays both a fragmentary sample of
he harmaline peak experience and a view of the drug's
mpleasant effects. The former is quite characteristic
rf the drug and consists of a state in which anxiety

nd destructive forces are assimilated into a peculiar
ype of ecstasy marked by a sense of energy, even
)ower and freedom ("as if I were to burst out through
ny nose, or my blood were to explode out of my ar-
eries")   and   at the   same   time, tranquillity ("like feei-
ng a strong sun for the         first   time in   my   life   or   .   .   .


 >eace ... in the moment of death"). Frequent sym-
 >ols of this power are, aside from the sim and the
>rocess of dying, fire, tigers or lions, dragons, aU of
 hem typical of the psychic domain tapped by harma-
 ine Yet, to he fire or to he a lion in actual life is
M>mething that not many can even conceive, and this
nay account for the fact that either symbolic visualiza-
 ion or an experience of pure feeling (as iu the quota-
ions in the earlier parentheses) is the most that the
 iverage person can allow himself without meeting
 >sychological obstacles. I think that this patient's dis-
covery of his sense of self and freedom for his every-
iay "I'^ was a step toward practical realization, but
this was all that he could afford to see without threat-
ening the structure of his present personality.
   The state of physical discomfort, fatigue, and half-
jleep (with unclear dreams), present throughout most
>f the session just described, constitute 3ie typical

'adverse reaction" to harmaline. Though little in it
svould suggest its being more than a physical toxic
yndrome, the time of onset, the persons who are prone
:o it, and the contexts in which I have seen such a