ikened to a spot on a mountain top from which the
jurrounding panorama may be viewed; yet being on
he top of the mountain does not supply more than the
jossibility of seeing, whereas this process of observa-
ion is different from that of mountain climbing. The
^articular view that can be seen from a given spot
mplies the viewpoint and makes it explicit, and in a
jimilar fashion the particular insights that may be ob-
:ained from a given state of consciousness imply and
express that level of awareness. Yet insight is distinct
Tom the mental state from which it originates and con-
stitutes the result of a creative act in which conscious-
less at a certain height is directed toward what lies
jelow.
   In other words, that "center" which can "justify life
n an empty room" has        to be brought into contact
vith the periphery of everyday life; the "heaven" of
spiritual experience must be brought to bear on the
'earth" of particular circumstances before real under-
Jtanding can develop. And only then can life be cre-
ated (i.e., behavior chosen) according to the point of
dew implied in the transient flash of understanding.
   The reason it is difficult for the above synthesis to
>ccur is that from the mountain top the valley may be
nvisible for a dizzy person who may feel inclined to
ook at the stones, or even to fall. And the atmospheric
conditions are such that the mountain top can hardly
>e seen from the valley. Or, translating this into em-
)irical terms, a person's present diflBculties may be
 lard to bring to mind during the peak experience, when
 luch reflection would be so desirable; or their unpleas-
 mtness may lead the person to avoid remembering
 hem; or the particular state of mind that constitutes
 he peak experience may be disrupted by such thoughts.
    On the other hand, when the person is closer to
 he issues of his daily life, to which he is most vul-
 lerable, he may not be able to reflect on them at all,
 or he himself will be lost in them   —  like our patient
 vith the bell ringing and the mother asking him to do
 hings for her.
   Since neither one of the alternatives is a complete
 mpossibility, though, I believe that much value should
86               The Healing Journey
be attached to the attempts at directing the mind, at
the time of the "good"      MMDA       experience, to the
conflicting situations in a patient's life, as well as to
the patient's remembering his peak experience at the
time of contact with his difficulties.
   It is the latter that naturally occurred during the
days following the session under discussion, and this
explains the patient's use of the past tense, even when
he was not only recalling, but re-experiencing, the
taste of "centeredness" in face of given circumstances
that he had ix>tentially contemplate during the course
of the drug's effect.
   The way in which the patient alternates between
"remembering" his experience of calm satisfaction and
moments of despair (when he thinks that the treat-
ment has been worthless) indicates that the state of
mind reached under the facilitation of    MMDA      is not
something that simply lasts for a given time and then
is lost, but one that may be learned. Once a person
has used his mind in that way, he has easier access
to the same way of functioning. And in this learning,
whereby a desirable attitude can be "remembered" not
only intellectually but functionally (as the movements
of writing and walking are remembered when we do
them) after it has been adopted once, lies, I beUeve,
one of the major justifications for the edification of
an artificial peak experience. This could be Hkened to
the guiding hand which holds that of a child to show
him how to draw a letter, or those of the practitioner
in M. Alexander's system, showing a person how to
stand or sit so that he can feel the "taste" of rightness,
or, in the conception of Mexican shamans using peyotl,
the guiding hand of God. Once in possession of such
discrimination or knowledge, it is up to the individual
to remember it and put it into practice. An expressive
passage on the role of learning when applied to a state
of mind is the following recollection of Jean-Pierre
Camus (quoted by Huxley in his Perrenial Philoso-
phy):

    I once asked the Bishop of Geneva what one
  must do to attain perfection. "You must love God
                MMDA and the Eternal Now                      87

 with  all your heart," he answered, "and your
 neighbour as yourself."
    I did not ask wherein perfection lies, I re-
 joined, but how to attain it. "Charity," he said
 again, "that is both the means and the end, the
 only way by which we can reach that perfection
 which is, after all, but Charity itself. Just as the
 soul is the Ufe of the body, so charity is the life
 of the soul."
    "I know all that, I said. But I want to know
 how one is to love God with all one's heart and
 one's neighbour as oneself.
    But again he answered, "We must love God
 with all our hearts, and our neighbour as our-
  selves."
    I   am nofurther than I was, I repUed. Tell me
  how  to acquire such love.
     "The best way, the shortest and easiest way of
  loving God with all one's heart is to love Him
 wholly and heartily!"
    He would      give   no other answer. At   last,   how-
 ever, the   Bishop      "There are many besides
                         said,
 you who want me to tell them of methods and
 systems and secret ways of becoming perfect, and
 I can only tell them that the whole secret is a
 hearty love of God, and the only way of attaining
 that love is by loving. You learn to speak by
 speaking, to study by studying, to run by running,
 to work by working; and just so you learn to
 love God and man by loving. All those who think
 to learn in any other way deceive themselves. If
 you want to love God, go on loving Him more
 and more. Begin as a mere apprentice, and the
 very power of love will lead you on to become a
 master in the art. Those who have made most
  progress will continually press on, never believing
  themselves to have reached their end; for charity
  should go on increasing until we draw our last
  breath."2
  2 Aldous Huxley, The Perennial Philosophy (New York and
London: Harper & Brothers, 1945), pp. 89-90.
88                       The Healing Journey
   What complicates this picture is that in the case of
higher (non-instrumental) attitudes and ways of mental
functioning, as in that of motor skills, the learning
process is interfered with by the arousal of habitud
patterns of response that are incompatible with the
new. In other words, remembering the sane state ^ be-
comes possible only when specific stimuh are not elic-
iting the conditioned responses which the individual
wants precisely to get rid of. Consider, for instance,
one more quotation from our patient's diary:

           It   is   now one week       since   the session with
      MMDA,         and today I felt alone again, in my bed,
      in   my    dark, hot room, in this sinister house, and
      I    feel like escaping, like     going someplace, to a
     movie perhaps, or to visit Alberto, or anybody,
     and I know that I will feel bad anyhow, for I
     won't be able to get out of myself, and I will be
     with them like a zombie, Uke a Uttle boy crying
     inside, licking his wounds or masturbating, and
     introducing his fingers into his anus, hating his
     parents and dreaming that he is a king.
        And I feel all this today, only a week after
     having seen something of a definitive cure. And
     why? Because I didn't sleep well last night (after
     a quarrel with Alice), because garbage is accumu-
     lating in my soul again, because I came to wait
     for Ana's phone call. (Damn her! She slipped
     away from me) That is it!! She screwed me up
     by not calling me. My security is down to zero
     again, and I continue to be one himdred per cent
     dependent on others.