patient expressed by, "I see myself as on the day when
I raped her"   brou^t immediate              relief.  Moreover, a
screen   memory can, by virtue of           its   symbolic charac-
ter,   pack into       an experiential meaning that no
                   itself
single   memory  of a fact from a person's life might
convey. True, there are instances of traumatic events
(an example of tiiese is the separation from the wet
nurse in our first illustration), but in many lives there
is probably no single episode in which the abdication
from self took place, but a series of microtraumatic
interactions. The imagined day of an imaginary rape,
thus, is most probably condensing the guilt for count-
less occasions, of which those recollected are a sam-
68               The Healing Journey
pie. And that sample is enough to come to terms with
the issue.
     My respect for the power of symbols increased great-
ly one day in my early practice when I was unsuccess-
fully treatmg with hypnosis a woman with an acute
case of vomiting. She was in the second month of
pregnancy, and her vomiting was so severe that it was
becoming a threat to her life. Her newly-wed husband
had died about a month before, and a connection be-
tween his death and her present condition could be
suspected but was not clear to us at the time. She
was a good hypnotic subject, and because of the emer-
gency I attempted suppression or substitution of the
symptom; but as the days elapsed, the effectiveness of
my post-hypnotic commands diminished.       A   colleague
then suggested the initiation of a guided daydream in
the trance state. I do not remember this clearly after the
ten years that have elapsed since, but I do recall
the crucial scene of it, in which the woman stood fac-
ing her husband and could see his stomach through his
 transparent abdomen.   My   colleague acted on inspira-
 tion and instructed her to take his stomach and eat it.
 She did, and upon waking up, her nausea was gone.
 An action carried out in fantasy, the "meaning" of
 which neither she nor we could rationally understand,
 had cured her of a vomiting so deeply rooted as to
 resist hypnotic manipulation and so severe as to threat-
 en her survival.
    Similarly, I am ready to believe in the therapeutic
 value of confronting memories that never took place
 in external reality. They are an embodiment of a psy-
 chological reality that may not be contacted at the
 time, at least not in that form. Yet this is not the last
 step. Once our patient had accepted the idea of having
 rapped somebody, he was ready to look into the facts.
 He had accepted the worst. He had pleaded guilty to
 his worst accusations. Now he was not defensive any
 more, but open to his reality, ready to see.
    What he saw may seem to us more innocent than
 his fantasy of a rape, but we must not forget that this
 time it was surely he who was the agent of the actions
  remembered, and the comparative mildness of the
                  MDA, the Drug of Analysis           69

crimes  is compensated for by the reality-quality or cer-
tainty of his memories and the measure of his involve-
ment and responsibility. Screen memories, just like
symbols, both reveal and stand as obstacles to a fuller
revelation. They both disclose and cover up. Yet par-
adoxically, once the cover is lifted, we may find that
nothing was hidden behind it. Or, phrased differently,
what was covered up was nothing. For there can be
no question as to the activity of covering up, no mat-
ter how empty the container. This paradoxical fact, I
think, is one way of understanding the whole therapeu-
tic  process: daring to look at the skeleton in the closet
. . . and finding that it is not there.

    The willingness to become a patient in the psycho-
therapeutic endeavor is already an indication of a will-
ingness to lift the lid of what appears to be a Pandora's
box. Even more so is the decision to experience the
effects of a drug that will rend the veils of the ordinary
 state of consciousness. Yet, drugs and all, I think that
 few are able to make the last step in "looking at the
 real thing." Looking at the symbol or dealing with it
 in a symbolic way is already a great challenge and
 without doubt a healing adventure. But even beyond
 the battle with the dragon is the discovery that the
 dragon was an illusion, which realization, by the way,
 is the real killing of it.
    Our patient was now ready to see the worst in him-
 self, after accepting the blame of being a rapist. What
 did he see?  A  certain measure of destructiveness in the
 way he had gone about findmg his pleasure. His judg-
 ment of himself in this was severe, but his sternness
 had the taste of for^veness: "Well, here I am, and I
  am responsible for myself. I take it." Essentially, he
 could take it. It was not unbearable to have made mis-
  takes. It was far more tolerable to him to face his
 faults tiian the substitute that he had found for what
  he implicitly assumed to be a greater terror: the crimes
  of a previous incarnation, the meanness and lascivious-
  ness of his grandfather, his own act of raping. As he
  gradually moved from his habitual avoidance of the
  issue, the crime was found to be closer and closer to
  home, but smaller. It never ceased to be a crime for
                                                       —
70               The Healing Journey
him, but he found it far more tolerable to face it
Even more, it was exhilarating, and it added direction
to his life. "I did those wrongs and must compensate
for them with good ... I take full responsibility for
myself."
    Thus we can frequently see a successful    MDA     ses-
sion as a process of reaching a truth through the indi-
cations of error. For error is often in the nature of
a shadow of truth, a shadow pointing toward its source.
Yet, when we find the source, we find that the shad-
ows of error are like those cast by the setting sun
much bigger than the object.
    If the above is true, not only of MDA     sessions but
of psychotherapy in general, or even of life, there is
a sense in which it is particularly true of MDA, when
compared with the other drugs dealt with in this book.
The domain to which the content of     MDA     experiences
belongs is that of life events, and the truth relevant to
it is a truth of facts. The domain of     MMDA,      as we
shall see, is more that of feelings in the present than
that of events in the past, and when we speak of
 feelings we do not think so much in terms of truth as
in those of depth and genuineness. The domain of
 harmaline, on the other hand, is that of visual sym-
bols of archetypal content, and here, too, we do not
 habitually speak of myth in terms of truth but in terms
 of beauty and revelation. Ibogaine is, of all the drugs,
 that most related to the direct experience of reality,
 according to the judgment of many who have been ex-
 posed to a broad range of psychochemicals. Still, such
 contact with reality has the quality of an ineffable
 experience at the moment, rather than a clarification
 of events. Of all psychotropic agents,  MDA     is the one
 which best deserves to be called a "drug of truth." An
 active concern for truth seems to be characteristic of
 it, not only in instances like those presented here, but

 in the reactions of more healthy individuals who have
 become concerned with their present lives. In such
 cases, the effect of the drug is frequently in the nature
 of the great urge to clear away the distortions that
 plague and impoverish human relations and to open up
 channels of communication that can make life among
               MDA,   the   Drug of Analysis         71