Wife. (As    spectator):!   don't know if it's the
  MMDA      or Dr. N.
Doctor. It's the dream; all it takes is to start with
  a good seed. So I think you can get more out
  of this, if you go on being this room. Say all
  you can about yourself, as a room, not disre-
   garding the obvious             —
                              anything about color,
   temperature, the dimensions, whatever.
Patient. I get the impression it was painted white,
   almost like an apparatus you'd see, like a ma-
   chine in a hospital. It was obviously man-made.
Doctor. But say it in the first person.
Patient. I am painted white-yellow, kind of a
   warm white, and I'm obviously man-made, with
   handles and knobs and things, and the signifi-
   cance I get is that I am the part of intellect,
   not of emotion. That's very much like my con-
   scious mind really is. Consciously, I'm usually
   very intellectual; the emotions are inside.
Doctor. So you are an artificial room, designed
   to protect this baby.
Patient. It's interesting that I wouldn't call it arti-
   ficial at all. In a way, "artifical" is true, but
   to me it has a connotation of not being real.
   To me a machine is just as real as a human
   being. It's just created in a different way, so it
   kind of bothered me to use that connotation
   "artificial." It's here, but it's something else.
   It's just as real, though.
Doctor. Yes. You are controls, man-made . •    .


Patient.   .   .More a matter of well-defined, with
                   .


   boundaries and laws, that are clear-cut, that
   aren't fringes. Ether it's here or it isn't here,
  like I   can have exactly, and that's what it is.
                              it
Doctor.    What   can you see as a room in you?
                       else
  Could you give a description of your feelings re-
  garding yourself as a room?
Patient.My main purpose, that I can see, is to
  take care of what's inside, which is this baby,
   and I can't get to it, for I feel that I have all
   around these devices and apparatuses, to main-
1   12                     The Healing Journey
         tain the right environment for the mside, like
         temperature, atmosphere, etcetera. So my main
         function, as I see it now, is to just keep the
         optimum environment           for the baby.
     Doctor.      You      said   something about being sani-
         tized?
     Patient. Yes, the        way    it   was   in the   dream   .   .   .

         Now      I   am
                   almost an incubator.
     Doctor. Would you concentrate a bit more on
        that —^how it feels to be an incubator.
     Patient. How it feels to be an incubator? Some-
        how it doesn't seem to be enough. I'm having
        trouble identifying with it, because what I was
        doing before was half looking at it. Now I'm
         trying to be  it completely, and the action of

        being this incubator just isn't enough. I'd like
       to do other things, somehow, but I can't, be-
        cause I'm an incubator, and an incubator isn't
        supposed to, and this baby is the most impor-
        tant thing, so I can't really be concerned with
        anything else.
     Doctor. Does it make sense in your life to say,
        "I am an incubator for the baby to be bom,
                                      —
        but this is not enough ^to be an incubator"?
     Patient. In my life I have never been aware of
        being this incubator. What I have been trying
        to do is have the incubator do what the baby
        is supposed to do, if anything. I'm trying to get
       the baby out of here. Well, in the dream, the
        way I do it is to wait until somebody ... No
         ..  OK, the way it is in the dream, I go to
             .


       the incubator and pick up the baby. Now, as
       the incubator, I'm trying to do what the baby
       is supposed to do, rather than waiting for
        someone to come and pick it out, and it's inter-
         esting that there is no feeling that at some
         point the baby is going to wake up and open
         the door. It has to be an action from the
         outside.
     Doctor. Isn't there anything in being an incubator
         that suggests an action          from the outside?
               MMDA and the Eternal Now                 113

 Patient. I    an action from the outside, yon say?
              am
 Doctor. The             is an action from the out-
                   incubator
   side, a lot of action, a lot of
                                   manipulation of
   machinery, in that room, that sanitized room,
   which is all action from the outside, which con-
   verges on the baby, as if there were not enough
    faith that the baby will survive without
                                                 so
    much      incubation.
  Patient. Well,    it                I have been set
                         feels like this:
    up to do something specific,    which    is to keep

    everything normal and   constant    and   all that. I

    should be doing that, and   if  Tm    not,  I'm fail-
    ing. And I don't have  any  free   will of  my own
    as an incubator, so I have   to   wait  until  some-
    body from    outside  tries    to   do    something
    through me, whether it's open the door or
    change any of the constants. Now, whether the
    baby needs it or not I don't know, because I
     don't reaUy    know     anything about the baby.

  The tape goes on for a long time and shows an
impasse that could not be resolved in the session: The
"baby" in the patient wants to get out, to be bom,
but wiU not cry for help or feel the despair of being
locked in. Yet only feeling could free him, for it is
the patient's feelings that are being locked in and
replaced by thinking and self-manipulation (incuba-
tor). After this situation       was exposed, the problem
was tackled more         directly in   an encounter between
the patient and his wife. The rule was that they could
voice nothing but the feelings of the moment (i.e.,
withholding    opinions,   judgments,   interpretations,
thoughts), this was not only useful to the patient, but
a rewarding experience in communication for the
couple.

Whenever not only feelings and physical symptoms but
imagery and the desire to communicate are slight, a
previous dream of the patient may be taken as a
starting point for therapy. The increased faculty of
creating imagery under         MMDAmakes it easy for
the patient to re-create dreams and deal with them as
                                                         —
114                The Healing Journey
an ongoing process, whereas an enhancement of th€
ability to  read into metaphoric or symbolic forms i^
favorable to the unfolding of their meaning.
   The following instance, from the session of a young
scientist, will complement previous examples of the
handling of imagery, since it shows the process of
"encountering" between the patient's different sub-
selves as portrayed in multipledream elements. Thisl
is a common resource of Gestalt therapy, but littlel
has been described of this procedure, and it can bel
so useful with   MMDA (and ibogaine) that it deserves|
detailed illustration.
     The dream      was examined in this session con-
                 that
sisted of a single image,  which the patient described         I



before the drug had begun to take effect. In this
scene  —part of a dream that he could not remember
there was a shrimp stapled to the inside of a plastic          |