felt. Guilt for not having stood up for his nana, not de-
fending her, not leaving with her. Now it seems to him
that this     was the   point.   He       wanted to leave; further-
more, he was planning to leave the house, but his
parents did not allow him to. "It was horrible ... a
sense of weakness, weakness!" But now he also re-
members that after this he pretended to be weak, he
just played the good, weak boy, because when he didn't,
there was something very disgusting, something very
unpleasant that they did to him. "They came up with
all this stupid thing of guilt and hell. I had a very real
conception of the world, clear and clean. I feel it . •        .


and then came a host of demons, devils of another
world, pain of punishment           things that weren't in
                                      .   .   .


my scheme, and were      imposed  on  me. Who did this?"
His maternal grandmother? This is not clear. He goes
on reminiscing about the threats of punishment, sin,
heU, and devouring fire. "I had great trouble in believ-
ing that. To me, fire was fire, and if people went to hell,
there was no blame. And the person would have no
body, and therefore nothing in which he could suffer.
So this was a lie, a trick, a trick. For what? To make
me behave. Ha, Ha!         A
                          trick to make me behave. So I
would be a bastard rather than be mistaken. I would
be a bastard, but a real one!"
   As he goes on talking of fire and hell, now he sud-
denly evokes the image of glowing coals on which he
inadvertently dropped a necklace, and the sorrow of
not finding the pearls any more. Now he understands
                     MDA, the Drug of Analysis                    33
that sorrow. It was not his mother's necklace, as he had
believed, but his nanny's. It belonged to that woman
who had given so much, invested so much effort, hav-
ing nothing, and  who was so ill-treated. And then
somebody had spoken of hell. A maid perhaps?
  "No, I am certain it was somebody else, somebody
who argued with authority. I believe it was my mother
... my mother! It was my mother. She was lying to
me. Yes, it was my mother. How awful! How stupid!
And    she    made me    live this guilt!   And   this striving to
be what I wasn't, and the fear to be what I was! What
narrowness and stupidity! What insistence on making
me to her taste, damn it! She didn't have a child to
have him, but to make him. To make him into her
image!      And   she forced   me   into this stupid thing of sin
and   hell.   They coidd not be good and        fair   without   this
stupid thing. What an idiotic lady! What a status-seek-
ing woman,    danm it! No authenticity. Perhaps there
is   more ... a postponement of values. What for? To
play the sweet young virgm, to play the lady. And my
father is a bastard, too, for that; they both exploited
an image. Ouch, how tougih it is to see your parents
shrink!     How
              small do I see them now! It seems that
they jomed forces aganst me. Not against me, but
against Nana, against life. Now I remember how they
regarded me as unintelligent. I was very perceptive,
intelligent, and I could fool them, ha, ha! Yes, using
precisely their arguments, the arguments they used to
put me down, more than put me down. Terrible! This
is more terrible! They subordinated my life, the life of
their favorite son, to such a pile of rubbish!"
     This      from the picture of his parents and the
            is far
feelings thathe expressed toward them in his autobiog-
raphy. He had even remembered the dining room as
beautiful. His Intuition was right          m
                                       tellmg hhn that
something had gone wrong with him at an early age.
A  complete change had occurred in his feelings in that
these were buried and replaced by a set of pseudo-
feelings acceptable to his parents. No wonder that he
felt limited and mifulfilled!
   The session started at noon, and at 3 a.m. the fol-
lowing morning the patient went to bed. He went on
34                 The Healing Journey
thinking about this throughout the next day, and
around noon he dictated to a tape recorder, interrupted
by outbursts of weeping, a description of what had
occurred to him the previous day and what he was
feeling at the moment. This is how he ends:
   "I have to reflect upon this: Why do I think my
nurse suffered so much? Or was it myself that really
suffered? She was so detached from so many things
that it is possible that she did not suffer when told to
leave. She just felt sorry for the boy who remained
alone. That was her only sorrow. And for me the sor-
row was staying alone, completely unadjusted. I
suffered indeed, from a brutality. I suffered because
my nana was leaving, I suffered because she was fired.
I suffered for remaining alone. I suffered because she
was unfairly treated, and I suffered from my impotence.
Not being able to do anything! It was losing a part of
myself. What lack of consideration on tiiie part of my
parents! Lack of care, mismanagement, selfishness.
They did not love me      at all. Sheer theatrics. Sheer
theatrics.Perhaps in the course of time they have seen
how satisfying it is to love a son, and they have loved
him, but I think that I was not loved at the begmning.
I was pampered, it is true, but the feeling of love was
only with  my nana.
     "Now came the problem    that I had in appearing as
a master with a mask, in order to be accepted in ibis
new environment. It was my home, it is true, but it
was new, since my nana was not there. And I then
understood that I could have a lot of things by pretend-
ing to be good and weak. That was the mask I wore.
I think I wore it until yesterday. I have always wanted
to appear different from what I am. And I have always
doubted what   I   am, doubted   my   qualities.   And now   I
see that I have always worn this mask, and I know
how to adjust it to people and circumstances. This I
learned very early, to be a good boy, because other-
wise ... Ah! Now I remember that they once told
me that I had sucked the milk of a huasa (ignorant
peasant), and that was why I was so crude. I feel
honored to have taken my nana's milk! It is milk, milk,
milk, milk, milk^ of real breasty breasts! Of a really
                                                           —
                MDA,    the   Drug of Analysis             35

womanly woman! They said such things to degrade
me. They thought their boy was crude, that he had
the inclinations of a huaso, and therefore they inhibited
me or pushed me around so that I would not seem
too much like one, I gradually gave in, it seems.    A   child
is flexible, very flexible. I really didn't notice that I was
giving in, then. Now I understand the trouble ihey took
to put me into those schools. These were truly good,
but tihiey were a means of social climbing. They wanted
me to feel guilty for having nursed from a peasant's
blood. What a way to degrade my nana! That blood
was the noblest of all!
   "They slowly managed to make me betray this. And
this is my other sorrow: having betrayed my feelings,
not having seen her any more, not having told her
how I loved her, not having loved her any more
though deep down I always have loved her, and I have
lived with gratitude for her. Only with her have I ex-
perienced love in my life. Somewhat with my mother,
later, but not the same. And this, which was so strictly
mine, I forgot and postponed. This is the root of the
sorrow: having abdicat^ from myself. I found it: the
sorrow of having abdicated from myselfl I won't take
it any longer. I am going to be what I am and what-
ever I may be!"