I believe that this is a remarkable document, in that it
coherently describes a few hours that effected a radical
change in a person's psychological condition. In it is
portrayed a process that is the aim of psychotherapy,
and one that is normally achieved over a long period
of time. Drugs can facilitate the process, but even with
their help it is exceptional to witness a "one-day cure"
of the extent shown in this instance. Many people were
surprised to see the changes in the patient's expression
and demeanor on the following days. He stopped using
eyeglasses, except for reading, and the style of his dress
lost its formality. Subjectively, his feeling of his own
body changed, in that he retained some of the height-
ened physical awareness and pleasure experienced
with MDA, and not only his eyesight seemed to im-
prove but his auditory discrimination. In his thinking
36                    The Healino Journey
he felt more security, as he could maintain the cer-
tain^ of certain things, and this showed in his work
and professional dealings. He felt an abundance of
energy which was unknown to him, except in childish
play, which he could now remember from his early
years. Life was now basically enjoyable, and he knew
to what extent he had lived in a state of depression.
As to the lack of direction that he felt in his life, this
was replaced by a desire for further personal develop-
ment and a concern for human development in general,
which he has successfully been serving in creative ways
through his profession.
   This definitely fits with the picture that he gave of
his nurse when he was able to remember her, but for
one who knows him well it is hard to find better terms
to describe him. It would seem that the qualities which
he was projecting he was now able to express. This he
did   first    for himself, in his quest for self-perfection,
and for       his children, in the quality of the   company he
gave them. Then came his active concern for society,
in his work, and only at the end of a year did he feel
real love for his wife. (This step was the outcome of a
session of harmaline and         MDA
                                   which could be des-
cribed only at great length. Since it represents in many
ways an elaboration of the one summarized here, I
have omitted it from this account.)

I feel that       one of the values of this case history is in
the light      it sheds on the relevance of the past and its

explanation to the healing process          m
                                         emotional dis-
tuAances. It can be seen that it is not remembering
the facts that is important, nor even remembering
feelings, but the change in present views and feelings
which is involved in acknowled^g and confronting
reality, present or past The patient's view of his pres^
ent, before therapy, was part of the "mask" that he
was wearing, part of a role he had learned by which
he became a "good'' boy having a good boy's feelings
toward his parents. These feelings could be maintain^
only by *forgetting" the facts which did not support
them, facts which would give rise to other feelings,
not compatible with his role. Living up to his artificial
                 MDA, the Drug of Analysis              37
       — self-image created
self-image   ^the                     to meet his parents'
demands—meant     up     own
                     giving    his      experience, ignor-
ing what he had seen, heard, felt ("abdicating from
myself'). This was probably taking place in every as-
pect of his perception, not only in the interaction with
people but   m   the ordinary use of his senses. And this
was  evidenced   by the improvement in his eyesight after
therapy, his discovery of unseen nuances and unheard
sounds in nature. Wearing a mask seems to be an all-
or-nothing affair. It cannot be kept just for the parents;
it sticks so close to the face that it also interferes with

the sight of nature and the hearing of music. By the
same token, it is an all-or-nothing affair for a person
                 —
to be himself ^that is, to use his own senses, think
his own thoughts, feel his real feelings. There cannot
be both programming and a free flow of feelings and
thoughts. Only an openness to the unknown within per-
                                      —
mits the discovery of every instant as with the god
in Apuleius' story who would stay with Psyche only
on condition he not be asked who he was.
   For this patient, "being himself," opening up to his
own feelings, whatever the circumstances, meant open-
ing floodgates which were built to defend the land-
scape as he saw it. Early in his life he knew that a view
of his life like the one he grew up with could be main-
tained only at the cost of suppressing reality. This he
must always have known imconsciously (even though
he consciously ignored it, as he did all tiie rest) and
he therefore kept his conscious life in a watertight com-
partment. This explains his resistance to the effects of
MDA.
   And since his defensive system was a highly intelleo-
tualized one, it is understandable that a non-verbal ap-
proach was the most successful in bringing him to a
position of spontaneity. As he himself commented
early in the session, even the perception of his body
had been replaced by an a priori image of himself, but
this was surely a less guarded area and more safely
questioned than his life style, character, or feelings for
other persons. Once a direct contact with reality was
established, and it was really "he" who was feeling the
true senisations of his body, the gates were open, and
                                                             —
38                  The Healing Journey
he was in touch with a chain of associations that could
potentially leadhim to any experience on the same
level of reality.
   It may be useful to think of the healthy individual
as a system in which all parts are in commimication
and therefore every action, feeling, or thought is based
upon the total experience of the organism. An aspect
of such availability of experience is remembering
either overt, conscious remembering or the implicit
memory involved in taking past experience into ac-
coimt as a clinician does when making a diagnosis, or
a hiker before taking a leap. This does not happen in
neurosis. Here a person's feelings or behavior are not
based upon the totality of experience, but part is "shut
off' so that he lives in a fragment of himself at a time.
In most adults some narrowing of personality has
taken place, so that the psychological island on which
they live is not the whole territory into which they
were bom. And since childhood is the time of the
greatest spontaneity   and unity,   it   is   childhood   memo-
ries in particular that   become   dissociated    from present
experience.
     Itcan be seen from the above case history how in-
compatible    it was for the boy, at a given age (probably

three to four), to feel sadness and anger and at the
same time to be accepted by his parents ^the only   —
support he was left witii. He could only suppress his
feelings by suppressing the thoughts that caused tiiem
—  ^i.e., forgettmg. Remembering was then a threat to

his security, to his feeling that he was acceptable to
the grownups. Yet the adult man who came for therapy
is not in the same situation any more. His active for-
getting, his defensive structure, has persisted in him
as a useless remnant of his biography, a scar, an an-
achronous device that protects him from a danger that
long ago ceased to exist. For there is no real threat to
him any more in thinking one way or another about
his parents. The world is large, and he does not need
 them any more as he did when he was three years old.
Freud said that neurosis is an anachronism, and in that
 fact lies the possibility of psychotherapy. In a way,
 this can be conceived as an exploration of the feared
              MDA,     the   Drug of Analysis                   39