a quality, assuming forms of great beauty and signifi-
cance or the half-veiled meaningfulness of myth. This
is the realm of archetypal experience, if we take the
expression in its more common meaning, which stresses
the visual medium of representation. Particularly from
my experience in working with ibogaine, thou^, I
think that the essence of an archetype is not the visual
symbol but the experience that the latter conveys, and
this experience may just as well find a motoric form
of expression (dance, rituals) and be projected upon
the perception of the external world. This was the case
in owe patient's perception of things, "as if they had
                        Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality               1 79

just been created," his feeling of communication with
the selfhood of other persons beyond their masks, and,
in looking at photographs, his proneness to see each
gesture as a symbol and embodiment of a transcendent
intention or, on the contrary, as remarkable for its
meaninglessness. Whatever the validity of speaking of
archetvpal perception, movement, thinking, or relating,
as well as archetypal imagining, the latter is a distinct
psychological event which has been part of the experi-
ence, either fleetingly or throughout much of the ses-
sion, of about half the persons that took ibogaine. The
following are quotations from a retrospective account
given by one such subject:

     I see BLUE, blue, blue. I am on the floor, but
  with the body upright. I can rotate easily all the
  way round in a sitting position. All is blue . .              .


  blue     •Everything is beautiful. I extend my arm
               .   .


  and as I turn I draw a circle around me. I am
  sitting on the floor, and I draw a white circle
  around me in this turquoise-blue atmosphere in
  which I float. I then draw with my hand a smaller
  white circle while I look upward. I am entirely
  surrounded by this blue atmosphere in which I see
  a white circle around me and a smaller circle
  above . . . White, too. This atmosphere is dense.
  I try to look through my upper circle ... a peri-
  scope? What is there?                A
                             ray of clear light is be-
  ing formed in this dense blue atmosphere. It is
  becoming a shaft of light. I look, look through
  my       white       circle, look,   and more    light is   coming
  into this tube,           more white     li^t,   more and more,
  with blindmg and    filling force, and always more.
  And   more, and more. I look througji that ray of
  white light and / know that He is there, He, and
  . .  and that light, that tube, that immense white
       .


  ray beyond is blue, blue, BLUE! (And this is a
  different blue from that of the first time.) This is
  a pure, clean blue, transparent, eternal, infinite,
  serene, that goes upward, that is the ALL! White-
  blue that is distance with no physics, enormity
1   80                        The Healing Journey
     with no measure, Universe devoid of laws.
                                             It was
     God.    was God. God. God.
             It
       This was unexpected. I wept. I weep now and
     every time I remember. I withdraw to remember
     and weep.
        Nothingness again. I feel fullness in relaxation
     as after a great pain. I am on the floor again and
    I hear tiie          music from the radio with    fast   rhythms.
    Now      it is       my     that responds, not my mind
                              body
     or   spirit.    I feel I am a puppy. I am surrounded
    by other puppies and play with them. I hear                      their
    sweet barking. Then I believe I am a cat        no!      .   .   .


    I am a pony! I gallop. Now I am something like
    a tiger .   . like ... I am a panther!
                     .                            black      A
    panSier! I defend myself, I back up I breathe
    forcefully with a panther's breathhig, feline's
    breathing! I move as a panther, my eyes are a
    panther's, and I can see my whiskers. I growl,
    and I bite. I react as a panther that defends itself
    and     attacks.
          Now I hear drums. I dance. My joints are gears,
    hinges, nuts. I can be a knee, a bolt, I can be any-
    thing, almost everything. And get lost again in
    that chaos of nothingness              and sensations tiiat re-
    late to abstract ideas with              vague and changmg
    forms, where there            is   the intuition of the truth of
    everjrtihing         and an Order which one         is about to
    discover.


And       toward the end of the s^sion, four hours               later:


       Again into nothingness. Tiredness. I am on my
    knees on the  floor, my hands on the rug, my head
    hanging. I feel the wave coming again, the dizzi-
    ness taking possession of me. I press into the floor
    ... I am on a lid ... a great wheel that is also
    a lid, and I must open it! I strain to the limit to
    make     it   turn, grabbing tiie spokes.        The   lid turns,
    gyrates. Suddenly I find myself under it, on a big
    wheel with spokes and spaces between. There is
    a thick axle at the center which seems to unite it
    to the lid, and also goes further under the wheel
                     Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality     181

  I am on.          How
                   have I fallen in here? I cannot
  explain. I did not realize when I feU ... I must
  get out of here. ... I must get out! Going up is
  impossible. It must be down. Through the bars I
  see a deep darkness. It must be down. Through
  that tube of emptiness ... It doesn't matter ... I
  must get out of here, away from this wheel that
  is suspended             m
                  this tunnel with no walls. Perhaps
  through the mechanism of the axle ... I know
  that tiEis wheel can go up and down. Desperately,
  I seek among the parts of the mechanism. I hear
  the doctor's voice telling me: ''You be the axle.'^
  Surprise. I begm to feel like the axle. Steely, hajrd,
  turning, turning, turning, with a noise. I am the
  axlp for hours, hours . . . There is no time, bemg
  the axle. I turn and make a noise. I turn, I turn,
  I turn ... I feel that I am lifting my right-hand
  axle, which turns. I rise slowly to the limit of
  stretching       —
                always an axle.        My
                                    hand then moves
  forward. I have a dagger in my hand, and I am
  going to      I am going to kill! I step forward
                   kill!
  to   kill. am going to loll a ... a ... a ..
               I                                       .

  a    mummy! How horrible it is! It is a mummified
  corpse of a woman, dry, with a brown leather-
  like skm, and she has a bandage over her eyes!
  and she has a smile that is gruesome and sweet,
  as if she were having sweet dreams or listening
  ironically to what is going on. I sink my dagger
  into her twice. I feel that she rips like leather. I
  feel dirty, absurd ...