all the classic psychedelics, his unique contribution is
in the area of new or less known psychoactive
                                                  drags.
During recent years, commuting      between  the United
States and his. native Chile, which unposes fewer re-
strictions on drag research, he was able to experi-
ment with many new compounds that are not known
to professionals in the United States. With several of
these drags, he has done real pioneering work and
published the first existing scientific descriptions. At a
time when experimentation with mind-altering drags is
carried out mostiy by teenagers and lay persons, and
the professionals base tiieir opinions on sensationaUst
newspaper headlines, Naranjo has been able to con-
tinue sober and highly qualified psychiatric research.
   Besides being one of few professionals systemat-
ically working in this field, he was able to make several
important and original scientific contributions. Because
of his rich experience with various drags, he had
enough experimental background to develop the begin-
ning of a taxonomy of altered states of consciousness.
Even if much more experimental work is required in
this area, he seems to have laid the foundations for
future selective and specific drag-assisted psychother-
apy. In the future, it may be possible to choose from
a series of available psychoactive drags the substance
that will be best suited to the patient's particular prob-
lems and combine it with the most appropriate psy-
chotherapeutic technique. The possibility of such a
selective approach ui the future is evident from the
delineation of the specific effects of various drags des-
cribed in this booki It is also very clearly illustrated
by the condensed case histories.
   Probably the most significant contribution of Oaudio
Naranjo's experimental work is the investigation and
 introduction of    new                        from the
                          drags, distinctly different
 classic psychedeUcs.  These drags seem to be much
 easier to work with; they do not produce hallucinations
 and do not have deep disorganizing effects on the mind
 like   LSD,   mescaline, or psilocybin.   The   condition pro-
 duced by these drags can be exploited for depth ana-
 lysis,   but at the same time they are    much more     easily
xii                      Preface
manageable both by the patient and the therapist. It
seems appropriate that Qaudio Naranjo does not in-
clude them automatically in the old category of hallu-
cinogens or psychedelics, but coins from them new
and specific terms such as ''feeling enhancers'' and
"fantasy enhancers."
  A                                          book
     description of all the positive assets of this
would not be complete without mentioning Naranjo's
profound sophistication in regard to old reUgious sys-
tems. It has helped him to bridge the gap between
ancient wisdom and modem science on the one hand
and the seemingly irreconcilable confUct between dy-
namic psychotherapy and spiritual guidance on the
other. The modem reformulation of the concept of
the healing potential of agony and ecstasy and the
discussion of the relation between emotional growth
in psychotherapy and spiritual growth under the guid-
ance of a religious teacher belong to die most inter-
esting sections of his book.
   The richness of the clinical examples illustrating the
effect of the described drugs, as well as the various
techniques for handling difficult therapeutic situations,
add a new dimension to the book. They seem to have
a value independent of the drugs that have been ex-
plored and make this publication a practical handbook
of advanced psychotherapy.
   As a whole, Qaudio Naranjo's book makes ex-
tremely informative, stimulating, and exciting reading.
It is a must for all serious students of behavior sciences
interested in innovations of psychotherapy, in psycho-
pharmacology, and experimental psychiatry, as well as
in psychology of religion. Because of its unusual clarity,
it will also be an indispensable tool for intelligent lay-

men seeking reliable information in these fields.

                                   Stanislav Grof
                                   Chief of
                                   Psychiatric   Research

Maryland State Psychiatric Research Center
October 1970
                                                           —



                            FOREWORD: PROBE
                            INTO INNER SPACE



This book was completed in the earlier part of 1970,
while I made preparations for a journey that, I thought,
could be (and in a sense has been) of no return. I
was leaving behind thirty-seven years of a life shaped
by the study of music, philosophy, and medicine, and
by the pursuit of the philosophers' stone. I had been
an "eternal student," one always dissatisfied and want-
ing to reach beyond boundaries, to the point that my
scholarship involved the postponement of other as-
pects of my life. I had not done much (or, in a sense,
anything), since I was so busy wanting to know more.
On   this particular occasion,    however (that   is   to say,
 before embarking for Arica, Chile, on July 1, 1970),
I needed to settle my accounts with life just          ^
                                                      if I
were about to die; I needed to make my wiU, so to
speak. An aspect of this was giving expression to what
I learned, but scarcely communicated, during my life
 as a medical doctor devoted to clinical research in
psychopharmacology. I felt that as an experimenter
fliat is, one who chooses as his subject the study of the
         —
unknown ^I had the duty to communicate my observa-
tions. Only in this way, I felt, could I close the door
to this chapter of my life, if the experience that I had
amassed could become useful to others. Perhaps I
was being compulsively philanthropic or possessed by
self-importance in thinking in such a manner. As I
consider the book again, however, after it has aged
for several years in a drawer, I think that it may well
turn out to be a useful work, smce little has been writ-
ten for general audiences in the field of pharmacologi-
                           xiii
xiv                     Foreword
 cally   assisted psychotherapy,   and information about
the feeling and fantasy enhancers of which I speak has
been limited to a few papers in scientific journals.
   Although I completed this book in 1970 in Califor-
nia, the work described in it was carried out mostly
between 1965 and 1966       m Santiago de CMe, where
I also wrote the    MDA   chapter and conceived of the
book on the four drugs. I was at that time a research
psychiatrist at the pioneering Centro de Estudios de
Antropolo^a M6dica at the m^cal school of the
University of Chile. The creation of this department
had been under the initiative of the emeritus professor
of physiology, Dr. Franz HoflEman, who had thirty
years earlier founded Chile's first institute of physio-
logy. He was a man who, in his sixties, discovered that
physiological research was not everything, and as his
eyes were opening to the transcendent, he suddenly
woke up to the painful reality of the dehumanization
of medicine. The Center for Studies in Medical An-
thropology arose in an attempt to diagnose its theore-
tical and practical aspects, and to repair it How the
pursuit of this goal led me to the research described
in these pages could be a long story and yet one most
simply condensed in the statement that Dr. Hoffman
believed in an organismic rather than organizational
approach in the direction of the Center, and this, in
him, implied the faith that the greatest ^>od would
result from the support of individual initiatives and
styles.  My own initiative and style was that of explor-
ing the possible vitalizing effects of drugs which
seemed, momentarily at least, to open avenues of es-
sential expression and to hold in abeyance an individ-
ual's ingrained perceptual schwnata and conditioned
habits of response.
   I am deeply thankful for the occasion that Dr. Hoff-
man and the University of Chile gave me to do what
I wanted most to do during nine years of my life-
years that were not only productive in themselves but
also the foundation of all later understandings. Only
the atmosphere of great relaxation afforded by this
working context allowed me to confront fully what I
did not know; its lack of distractions permitted me to
                       Foreword                        xv