gree this older sister represented a mother substitute
and was so important to him that he not only agreed
to the gardener's manipulations for her sake but was
able to blame himself for it and thus protect her from
being punished. Yet it also became clear that it was a
poor substitute for his mother's love, since he did not
really experience it as true affection but as a rol^ she
adopted and a manipulation to attract her father's love.
In view of such later insight, we may regard the
patient's initial statements of mutual love with his
sister as self-deception, at least in part, and as the out-
come of a desperate need to beUeve that somebody
loved him.
   On the day following the session, in addition to the
writing that has been quoted, he jotted down the fol-
lowing remarks on his mother and stepmother:
   "When my mother died, I did not cry. On the con-
trary, I was happy that she died. I got along better
with my stepmother, until my father separated us."
   From this it would seem that much of the hostility
previously experienced toward his stepmother was the
displacement of repressed hostility toward his mother,
and as he could now acknowledge some of it (implied
in the fact of havmg felt happy at her death), his (re-
trospective) feelings toward his stepmother inproved.
A  similar displacement seemed to be taking place in
his anger toward his father, since he initially blamed
his stepmother for bringing about separation in the
family, and he now sees that his father separated him
from her. That his stepmother acted like a screen on
which were projected the unacceptable feeUngs toward
his parents is further confirmed by the course of the
48                The Healing Journey
MDA     session, which began with the perception of his
stepmother's expression in my face, but the dialogue
with her turned it into one with his mother as he pro-
ceeded.
   In the autobiographic pages written a week after the
session the patient says the following of his mother: "I
remember her as a woman of exceptional strength. I
think she was very good, but at the same time lacking
in affection, or at least in the expression of it. I recall
that I kept asking her whether she loved me, and she
would answer, 'Leave me alone, I am very tired!'
Every once in a while she gave me a kiss, but I don't
remember her as ever having caressed me." As to his
stepmother, he sees her as "a lazy and dirty woman;
she used to beat me and drive my brother to beat me
all the time. My sisters used to defend me. If I cried
or told on her to my father, she called me a sissy. She
spared the food, and I think that the incipient TB
                                      —
which I had was related to this or so my father
thought, at least ... I hated her as I never hated any-
body else, and she took her revenge by calling me
sissy, stupid, lazybones  .   . But I also feel sorry for
                                  .



her. How must she have suffered with such a pack of
monsters as we were!"
   It can be seen that the patient's views and feelings
have reverted to some extent to those prior to the
session. Not completely so, though. In his last state-
ment about his stepmother, there is an impUed recog-
nition that she  was the target of his own irrational
reactions, and he conceives of her attacks as a revenge.
On the other hand, there is some difference between
the original statements about his mother and the fore-
going: "... lacking in affection, or at least in the
expression of it. I recall that I kept asking her whether
she loved me, and she would answer, 'Leave me alone,
I am very tired!' Here there is a distinct acknowledg-
ment of his insecurity and frustration, and the notion
that his mother did not love him is closer to being ac-
cepted and expressed. The way in which he constructs
the sentence ("lacking in affection, or at least in the
expression of it") is a miniature replica of the process
whereby the contents of the session as a whole are
                   MDA,        the   Drug of Analysis                  49
being repressed again and restrained. First comes a
clear statement, then what appears to be a rational-
ization, a justification of the mother that may be under-
stood as a means of holding back the unacceptable
feelings that he would have if the former statement
were certain. This was typical of him throughout the
process described here. Under the effect of MDA, he
would vividly describe a scene (sperm wetting his face,
for instance) and then become concerned with its
reality.   "Can    this   be true? Did        this     actually   happen?
No. This    is    just    my
                          imagmation. I cannot really re-
member     this. I   was too young to remember anything.
But then why do I see this so clearly? And everything
seems so coherent! If this is true     Yes, it must be
                                               .   .   .