are like reservoirs of the experience that gave them
birth and are to some extent the means of re-creating
the experience. The fruits of expression are, like art,
a means of making the invisible visible and fixing in            |




a given shape a fleeting instant in the mind.




                    2.   Contemplation of Everyday Reality       \




Most important here      is the confrontation of stimuli I
(circumstances, persons) which are normally painfull
or elicit neurotic reactions. This is the opportunity fori
the discovery of a new pattern of reaction stemming!
from the integrated state, which would be less likelyl
to occur after the peak of serenity is over, and where
proximity to the given circumstances is too great. Con-
frontation in the mind before confrontation in reality|
takes place in a strategy which might be compared tc
that used by Perseus in his approach to the Medusa:!                         m
                      MMDA and the Eternal Now                    93

he does not look          at   her directly, but at her   reflectioii

in Minerva's shield.^
   Photographs are useful to this end, since the cues
oflEered by them are valuable startmg points for asso-
ciation with life experiences, in contrast with the
stereotyped views that are often elicited by verbal
questions.
  Whenever a new approach or feeling is expressed
which breaks the vicious circle of neurotic attitudes,
the expression of it may be encouraged in order to
^   it in the mind as part of the enlarged repertoire of

responses. An imaguiary encounter with a given per-
son, in which a dialogue is produced, may be a useful
resource, and also writing, which is perfectly com-
patible with the effect of          MMDA.
   The following illustration is from the report by a
young man who had been in therapy for five years
and was at the time of the session Uving through a
chaotic and painful period in his marriage:

      .   .   •   I   remember
                          lying on the carpet in the
    room,        enjoying a warm, glowing, soft sense
              fully
    of well-being. Dr. N. came to me and suggested
    that we talk together. I told him about my love
    for Jeanne and the hurt I felt. He suggested I
    write down my feelings on paper. I wrote as
    though writing a letter to Jeanne. I told her how
    much I loved her. And that I was waiting for her.
    During this time, I experienced the most acute
    sexual response, especially in the pelvic area. I
    was thoroughly immersed in the joyful fantasy of
    loving Jeanne. Loving her in a quiet, tender way,
    caressing her ever so gently. I felt, perhaps for
    the first time, that my desire to be tender and
    loving toward her was the power that would
    break through her sexual anesthesia.

   Their relationship improved after the session, since
the attitu de expressed in this letter persisted to some
   ^ Minerva is the goddess of wisdom,         suggesting that the
mirror-shield represents the mind.
94                     The Healing Journey
extent and replaced previous feelings of rejection and
resentment. The act of expression (by committing
these feelings to paper) can be conceived of here as
a commitment, as well as a realization, in the sense
of "making real" what was merely a feeling, living out
what was only a        possibility.




                        3. Exercising of   Decision in Face of
                                              Present ConfUcts

I usually ask the patient tomake a list of the conflicts
that he is aware of, or I make it with him before a
session with     MMDA,and this provides many questions
to consider at the time of an eventual state of psydio-
logical harmony.
     Conflict   is   perhaps the most central single mani-
festation of a neurotic disturbance, since  it is the ex-

pression of a disunity or split in personality. In the
exceptional moment of integration, when the usually
incompatible fragments of the person's psyche are
united, many of his conflicts will disappear. If the
integrated attitude of the person is not rendered ex-
plicit at the moment, it will be lost more easily once
the exceptional state is over; yet this is the occasion
on which the person may know the attitude of his
integrated self and learn what it feels like. When his
self is not there any more, the memory of such an
attitude will be one more thread in his fabric of ex-
periential remembering      —
                          and perhaps the best possible
advice as well.




                                HANDLING THE STATES OF
                                  FEELING ENHANCEMENT

Everything that  I have elaborated upon up to this
point applies to the kind of experience that ensues
spontaneously in about 20 per cent of aU instances
               MMDA and the Eternal Now                  95

after the intake of   MMDA,     It   may   apply in part to
the similar experience which supervenes in an addi-
tional 30 per cent of cases after therapeutic interven-
tion, as conflict resolution and personality integration
are achieved. But in about 50 per cent of all instances,
such feelings of "all-rightness," calm, and loving ac-
ceptance are not experienced at all, and in 80 per
cent they are not present at the beginning of the
session.
   In such instances, the reaction to the drug may be
predominantly that of an enhancement of certain emo-
tions and/or psychosomatic symptoms, or one where
imagery becomes the main object of attention. Each
one of the   possibilities constitutes a type of effect that
calls for distinct approach, and I shaU presently deal
with the predominantly feeling reactions. These feeling-
enhancement reactions might well be grouped together
with the "peak-experience" reactions, for flie emotions
are the focal point in both kinds of experience, yet
both are in contrast in terms of the kind of feelings
involved. As the peak experience constitutes MMDA's
"heaven," the feeling-enhancement state constitutes its
"hell." Instead cf calm and loving acceptance of ex-
perience, the emotions of the second state are typically
those of anxiety and discomfort, which render imme-
diate experience unsatisfactory.
   What the second type of experience has in common
with the first is the relevance of the feelings experi-
enced in relation to the present situation and to the
immediate environmental and social context. I find
such a "here and now" quality of the           MMDA  ex-
perience particularly suited to the non-interpretive ex-
istential approach of Gestalt therapy, which I have
     —
used as will be seen from the forthcoming illustra-
tions—   ahnost free from admixtures in the handling of
most   sessions.
   Experiences of discomfort are usually the outward
expression of self-rejection or the fear of imminent
self-rejection. Once this becomes explicit, the top-dog-
underdog impasse can be re-examined to see whether
the person can discover some value in his rejected side.
96                The Healing Journey
whether his judgmental standards fit his true judgment
or are in the nature of an automatic reaction, which
can be dispensed with. Some examples may make this
more     clear.
     Afemale patient has been encouraged to do or
express whatever she wants during the session. When
the drug begins to take effect she withdraws to her
bedroom, where she Ues down and listens to some
music. After five minutes or so, she returns to the
therapist in the living room and explains that she has
not been able to enjoy these minutes since she has felt
distressed at what she calls her "voraciousness"   she   —
could not really listen to the music since she wanted
a number of things at once, such as a drink, the
therapist's presence, and,   most of   all,   to be special.
   Since her discomfort seemed to be associated more
with her self-accusation of greed and voraciousness
than with the unavailability of means to satisfy her
needs, I inquired, "What is wrong with wanting more
and more?" This comment proved to be more than
superficially supportive, since it led her to an open-
minded consideration of the question. When I later
insisted that she state her wants and be increasingly
direct, she found that in giving way to the expression
of such wants she became more herself. What she
initially labeled "voraciousness" soon came to be seen
as wanting to be specially loved by a man. As I em-
phasized the humanness of this want, she saw the ac-
ceptability and even essentiality of fulfilling it in her
life, in one way or another. "I've been going after my