clash of the forces within the personality that the con-
flict may thus be exposed, understood, and eventually
resolved. Exposing the confliict    —
                                   a conflict that is basi-
cally that of being or not being, that between being for
                      —
or against oneself amounts to exposing the "monster"
in the mind in whom the denying force originated. Re-
solving the conflict, which is achieving unity, may be
likened to the slaying of the dragon in classical myths
and the acquisition of his power, or, alternatively, to a
taming of the beast, by virtue of which its dying ener-
gies are now put to the service of life.
     Theprocess of "descending" into the pathologic^,
chaotic, and destructive as a means of personal Integra-
            The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy   9
tion    not a discovery of contemporary psychotherapy.
       is
We may     find it, for instance, explicitly recognized by
Dante in the conception of his Divine Comedy. The
poem begins when the author, in the middle of his life,
finds himself lost "in a dark forest" he has entered
"while asleep." He envisages the "high mountain" in
the distance and wants to climb it and thus reach his
highest goal. But this is not possible. Three fierce
beasts (different transformations of the same one) suc-
cessively obstruct his way. His guide then appears to
tell him how such a "direct path" is impossible and
that he must first go through the underworld.
    Then Dante tells how he followed his guide and had
to contemplate one after another the different aberra-
tions of man until, much later, having gone through
hell and purgatory, he is told how these constitute
"diseases of love"—"the love that moves the sun and
the other stars."
    And the process which Dante describes in the Com-
edy is most relevant to what we may say on the utiliza-
 tion of "hellish" experiences elicited by drugs. It is
the traditional understanding of the contemplative way
in spkitual development. All passions are seen and re-
 cognized as different from the "I," the center of one's
 own existence. Not without stress or pain does Dante
bring himself to face the different scenes of hell, and
 on occasion he is unable to remain conscious at the
 shock C'e cade como corpo morto cade"'), but he
 maintains a detached attitude and leaves everything
 behind.
    Awareness, or consciousness, is, in fact, the single
 element that most psychotherapists in our day would
 indicate as the essential motor of transformation.
 Awareness of our processes is that which may bring
 them under our control, make them "ours." And, par-
 adoxically, in the act of being aware we are not only
 "it," but a more encompassing entity tihat may con-
 tinue to exist with or without "it." "Spirit is freedom,"
 says Hegel. This is the difference between Dante's hell
 and paradise, as well as that between the beginning
 and end of successful psychotherapy. For hell and par-
                                                    —
  adise do not differ in the forces portrayed ^just as
1                      The Healing Journey
there   is   a hell of   lust,   there   is   also in the    Comedy      a
circle in paradise       where dwell the loving             spirits,   and
to the hell of anger corresponds that of militant spir-
its: to the one of gluttony, that of those who are glut-
tons of celestial manna, and so on. Ilie difference lies
only in that what in hell is manifested as a "passion"
(something "suffered" passively) is in paradise a ^'vir-
       —
tue" ^from the Indo-European v/r: force, energy, and
also from die Latin v/r: man.
   The transforming effect of consciousness on the life
processes is a transmutation by which they become
more and not    less what they are. It is as if the state
of consciousness depicted as "hell" were one in which
our energies, not knowing what they really want, miss-
ing their true aims, had lost their natural channels.
When every part of man "remembers" what it truly
wants, sickness turns into health, and what was once
a parody of life becomes something which had been a
mere shadow.
   The voyage through chemically opened hells is not
different in essence from the age-old way of self-knowl-
edge nor from the process taking place through ex-
posure to the modem insight therapies. There are
technical differences in the Siree cases, but the main
difference     is   in the intensity of the process, so that
under the effect of drugs months may be dramatically
packed or condensed into hours. The process is stiU
the same as in all **ways of growth": an act of ac-
knowledgment of what has been avoided or pushed
away from the boundaries of awareness. Since what we
avoid looking at is what we fear, this must be an act
of courage. And since much of what we do not allow
into our field of consciousness is painful, uncomfort-
able, or humiliatmg, the acquisition of such self-insight
may  partake of these same qualities. The pain or an-
guish of some drug experiences may be thus understood
as the condense concentrated pain or fear of months
or even years of self-discovery, and may be the un-
avoidable price that a person has to pay for seeing
his reality.
    Experience    tells us that such a reaction is tempo-
rary, the      end of the via purgativa being self-accep-
                                                             1




          The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy     1


tance, but it is doubtful that such an end may be
attained without starting at the beginning, exposmg
the wounds that are to be healed      —
                                     conflicts to be re-
conciled,  self-hatred to  be re-examined,   shame and
guilt to be worked   through, and so on.
   Tlie fact that healing does take place proves that
the "problems" and sources of suffering have been in
a sense illusory.
   If the chemically elicited intensification of aware-
ness brings about an enhancement of pathology, this
is only because "normality" is partly maintained at the
cost of psycholo^cal anaesthesia, and "adjustment"
ordinarily is in the nature of a denial rather than a
transcendence of inner turmoil. Yet a further step in
awareness may show that all this pathology now laid
bare could thrive only in the dark, and ffie conflicts
causing it were the result of confusion-unconsciousness
itself.
   The paradox upon which psychotherapy        rests is that
the suffering that we avoid is merely perpetuated
through avoidance. Only by moving toward fear and
confronting the monster that is the source of agony
can the discovery be made that there is no monster
tiiere to fear. This sometimes finds dramatic expres-
sion in sessions in which an individual feels that he is
actually going to die, but, in the moment of ^ving in
to death, wakes up to the ecstasy of enhanced ahve-
ness; or in others where he feels that he is going crazy,
but, when he is finally able to surrender control, he
discovers that this was only a catastrophic expectation
of his, that the Pandora's box was really empty and his
urge to control obviated*
   We may conceptualize the process as one of insight
into the distinction between reality and illusion, as
one of "positive disintegration" (Dabrowski) or, be-
havioristically, as one of reconditioning and "desensi-
tization" through exposure to the avoided in an at-
mosphere of support, or any number of ways. For
practical purposes, though, it seems clear that the best
that the therapist can do is stand by the traveler in
hell as Virgil did by Dante, reminding him of his goal,
giving him courage to step ahead and see, pushing him
    2

1                       The Healing Journey
even, when he wants to retreat in fear. I believe that
the realization that hell is no hell must come from
inner realization and not from well-intentioned reas-
surance and brainwashing, so I find myself agam and
again saying to my patients, "Stay with it." Staying
with it is the way of going through it, whatever it is.
   Still, beyond hell there is purgatory, and Dante's