ally accompanies a fantasy is not so much that which
arises from the imaginary fulfillment of a wish, as it
would appear, but that of self-acceptance, involved in
the acceptance of fulfillment.
   In the present instance, the final episodes of the
patient's dream faithfully depicted his chronic state of
being and feelings and may be rightly regarded as a
regression from the previously experienced state of
inner freedom and fluency. Such a chronic state of be-
ing, nevertheless, was unconscious to the patient, in
that only unconsciously did he experience dissatisfac-
tion (i.e., as symptoms), while consciously developing
much resignation and even idealizing the postponement
of his spontaniety. Only after the episode in his harm-
aline session described above in which he felt all-spon-
taneous and all-himself was he able to sense the con-
trast between such openness and the sterility of his neat
 and clean but artificial and self-rejecting way of going
 about his ordinary life. Thus, he associated the abor-
tion scars, dryness, and texture of the womb in the last
part of his fantasy with the idea that his mother had
undergone abortions and with the thought that she had
 considered an abortion at the time when she was preg-
 nant with him. Even this thought, stemming from a
comment heard   as a child, may have been no more than
a symbol itself for the final experience of not feeling
loved by his mother, which he had denied, but could
now no longer avoid acknowledging.
   The conception-controlling nurses in the patient's
"dream" are hke an echo of his mother's attitude dur-
ing his childhood, during which time she continually
guarded him from imagined illness and dangers, sub-
jected him to restrictive diets and schedules. Her over-
protectiveness may further be indicated by the fact that
when she was told that her thirty-five-year-old son
would be undergoing the above-described session, she
sent me (a stranger to her) a detailed account of his
medical history since the time of his birth  —   a history
no different from that of an average child.
   The patient had found himself a wife with many of
his mother's traits: intellectual, moraUstic, responsible,
polite, and sexually inhibited. He admired her and felt
146                   The Healing Journey
guilty for not loving her more than he did. Yet he did
not find with her the depth of communication or in-
timacy which he later knew with another woman. For
four years, he felt unable to decide between his home
and his new love, and he felt continually more aware
of these alternatives as entailing a choice between
different sets of values. At a time when a choice had
become critical, he volunteered for the experiment in-
volving the cited harm aline session, in the hope that
this might give him a better understanding of himself
and thus help him in his decision.
   After the session, the patient sensed that his mar-
riage had been to him a choice of "dryness," to which
he had been adhering out of a sense of duty but not
love. His wants now became more pressing, and his
demands on himself diminished. Indeed, five days after
the session he indulged in impulsive behavior which
had no precedent in him. He got drunk in the company
of friends and became violent, and then forgot the
whole     incident.
   One mi^ht     speculate as to the effect that this excep-
tional reaction to    an already exceptional state for the
patient   (alcoholic intoxication) constituted an intui-
tively  sought continuation of his harmaline session.
For the latter had set up the scenery, so to speak, of
his psychological state of affairs, but it still remained
for the patient to experience the violence of his
smothered self in face of the "antiseptic" nurse im-
planted in his soul as a chronic anti-life force. Com-
parable episodes did not occur after this explosion of
anger, and the patient continued to feel more like him-
self than he did before the session. Now he has been
living for four years with his second wife in what he
feels is his   own    style.


Some  of the experiences undergone by persons during
their singleexposure to the effects of harmaline (as
has been seen so far in both the illustrations and com-
mentary) constitute a plunging of the mind into an
area of myth, transpersonal symbols, and archetypes,
and thus constitute an analogue to what is the essence
         Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious       147