of initiation in many cultures. Typically, for instance,
 the puberty ordeals are occasions when the young are
  brought into contact (with or without drugs) with the
  symbols, myths, or art works which summarize the
  spiritual legacy of their culture's collective experience.
 The attitude toward the world that is expressed by such
  symbols is regarded as important to maturity and to
 the order of life in the community, and for this reason
  its transmission is reverently perpetuated, made the
  object of initiations and of other rituals or feasts in
  which the people renew their contact with, or aware-
 ness of, this domain of existence, irrelevant to practical
 life but central to the question of life's meaning. The
 harmala-alkaloid-containing drinks of South American
 Indians are not only employed in puberty rituals but
 also in the initiation of the shamans, primitive psychia-
 trists whose expertise in psychological phenomena is
  revealed, for instance, in the fact that they are fre-
 quently expected to understand the meaning of dreams.
     Aside from the apparently therapeutic implications of
 an initiatory process (understood as one of establishing
 a connection between everyday consciousness and the
  archetypal domain), we may be left, after considering
 the sessions reported so far, with a feeling of incom-
 pleteness.A    process has been initiated, but then what?
A     person has undergone a novel experience and
 emerges from it with an enriched sense of selfhood,
 the intimation of a connection with a deeper region of
 himself, a more clear awareness of the noble and ar-
 chaic animal within, and the taste of a greater spon-
 taneity than he had heretofore known. All this is an
 asset and may suffice to bring about changes in feel-
 ings or symptomatic relief, to awaken new interests or
 orient the individual in a decision, as shown above.
Yet most of the sessions that I have seen leave me
with the impression of my having witnessed no more
than the first act of a drama. Symbols may remain un-
deciphered, conflicts unresolved, events in the visual
display interrupted at crucial points. In the case of the
subject in our last illustration, the ending of the dream-
like sequence itself suggests the subject's defeat and the
incompleteness of his soul's journey, and we can imag-
148               The Healing Journey
ine his unacknowledged frustration as the motive be-
hind his alcoholic intoxication and his unexplained
outburst of anger.
   All this suggests the desirability of an appropriate
context for the assimilation of the harmaline experi-
ence, which implies time for reflection in the days fol-
lowing a session, a certain freedom from excessive en-
vironmental constraints, and particularly the continu-
ity of the therapeutic contact. The question also natur-
ally arises as to the effect of a series of harmaline
experiences on the development of the themes, insights,
or feelings encountered in the first one. I have only
occasionally given harmaline more than once, but the
following case history, comprising a series of four
sessions, may illustrate both the nature of such an
evolution and the bearing of the sessions on cUnical
manifestations in the course of time.
   This is the case of a twenty-five-year-old woman who
had undergone psychoanalytic therapy for a year and
a half with great gains in terms of her personality, but
with no improvement noted in the symptoms which
constituted her main reason for imdergoing treatment.
These consisted of intense anxiety, fear of dying or
fainting, and physical symptoms like suffocation and
paresthesia. These symptoms occurred especially in gray
city streets, less so in curved, irregular streets, or those
bordered by trees. She also experienced anxiety in
movie houses and would usually close her eyes when-
ever something unpleasant was to be expected in a film.
The phobia was preceded by a period of absent-
mindedness in the streets, during which she would
often go beyond her destination, either walking or by
bus. The closest associations to the feared situation in
analysis were episodes of danger during the war, when
she had actually been (with her parents) in open spaces
under aircraft fire and in areas under attack by bomb-
ing. Yet the symptoms developed many years later,
during her father's fatal   illness.   The   exact relationship
between these two incidents had never become clear.
She had been very attached to her father, and also
shared his extreme violence. When she was a child,
he used to take her to the shore, and now that she was
            Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious         149

grown up, the    sight of a beach would put an end to
11  her anxiety and depression.
   Much of the patient's first session with harmaline
took the form of a series of dreamlike sequences rich
in archetypal content. The image of a tiger was promi-
nent in these visions and constituted the very first of
them. "Floating spots like a tiger's eyes" were the first
symptoms of the drug's effect and then many tiger
faces. Panthers followed and all sorts of cats, black
and yellow, and then the tiger. This was a very large
Siberian tiger, and she knew (for she could read its
mind) that she must follow it. This she did several
times, but none of the scenes seemed complete. Still,
I  "longing for the tiger" persisted in her. After an
 ipisode (to be described) in which she met her father,
she intuitively knew that she was now ready to follow
the tiger, and this proved to be the case. Here is the
description of the last episode, in her own words. The
quotation begins at a pomt after she has followed the
animal to the edge of a plateau and is looking down
toward the abyss, which is hell. It is round and filled
with liquid fire or fluid gold. People swim in it.

        The  tiger wants me to go there. I don't know
     how  to descend. I grasp the tiger's tail, and he
     jumps. Because of his musculature, the jump is
     graceful and slow. The tiger swims in the liquid
     fire as I sit   on   his back. I then   suddenly see my
     tiger eating    up a woman. But no!         It is not the
     tiger. It isan animal with a crocodile's head and
     the   body of a fatter, larger animal with four feet
     (though these weren't visible). All kinds of lizards
     and frogs begin to appear now. And the pond
     gradually turns into a greenish swamp of stagnant
     water, though full of life: primitive forms of Hfe
     such as algae, anemones, microoganisms, etcetera.
     It is a prehistoric pond.       Ashore appears, not
     sandy but covered with vegetation. Some dinosaurs
     are seen in the distance. I ride on the tiger on the
     shore. The serpent follows us. It catches up with
     us. I stand aside and let the tiger take care of her.
     But the serpent is strong and my tiger is in danger.
150                The Healing Journey
  I decide to take part in the fight. The serpent
  notices my intention, lets go of the tiger, and pre-
  pares to attack us. I hold its head and press on
  its sides so that it will open its mouth. It has an

  iron piece inside, like the bit of a horse. I press
  on the ends of this bit, and the serpent dies or
  disintegrates;    it    falls   to pieces     as   if   it   were a
  mechanical serpent. I go onward with the tiger. I
  walk next to him, my arm over his neck. We climb
  the high mountain. There is a zigzag path between
  high bushes. We arrive. There is a crater. We wait
  for some time, and there begins an enormous
  eruption. The tiger tells me I must throw myself
  into the crater. I am sad to leave my companion,
  but I know that this last journey I must travel. I
  throw myself into the fire that comes out of the
  crater. I ascend with the flames toward the sky
  and fly onward.