without caring about anything.         I    enjoyed moving
my      feet,   happy   to   dance and be   in the street. I
feit great pleasure in effecting every movement,
in being able to follow my own music. As I
crossed, there was a wreck in the middle of the
street. Several cars collided head-on and formed
a rising bouquet. I passed on without caring much.
I knew that there were probably dead people in
the accident, but I didn't care. Their time had
come, and things were just as they were. I knew
that I would die, too, some day, but this didn't
matter either, since that was the way it was. I
carried my skeleton inside since the time of my
conception. This is what I was: dance and death,
but all together. I was my death and my skeleton
alive, and dance with joy in crossing the street.
   But I knew why I couldn't cross the streets,
why I couldn't walk in the streets, and this I have
forgotten now. It had to do with my being bad,
with death, with the wish to die, because I am
bad.
   I want to die. Or I wanted to die. I was seek-
ing this instant        —
                     a point, infinitely small, or a
fraction of time imperceptible in its brevity, the
moment of death, this extremely short bridge
where life and death touched, where the opposed,
contradictory, and disunited cease to exist. This
was the only way of uniting all my pieces. This
is the only way of finding, for an instant, har-
mony. The moment when one is neither alive nor
dead: in this moment one KNOWS. I don't know
of what knowing consists. It is not just knowing,
but knowing and understanding at the same time
•   .
    . It is the essence of life that matters, and the
only way of grasping it is in the moment of dy-
ing. Moreover, here the opposites disappear; God
and sex come together; they blend. All things are
one, the good and evil, beauty and ugliness.
   The thing is that I had to die. Unknowingly, I
was seeking death. But without joy, with con-
sciousness. And something in me held me back.
Streets are death. It is so easy to die. Not that I
1   56                      The Healing Journey
     would deliberately throw myself under the wheels
     of a car, or that I would step down from the curb
     on purpose to do it. But it is as if the protective
     mechanism would suddenly not work. I wouldn't
     realize anything. This happened to me several
     times before the onset of my phobia. I would
     walk in the streets and suddenly realize that I had
     walked for several blocks without knowing how
     I had done so. And I would also, on occasion,
     "wake up" in the middle of the street, surrounded
     by terrible traflBc. At least once, I remember, I
     was awakened by the cursing of a driver who had
     to jam on his brakes to avoid running me over.
        But there was a part of me that did not want
     to die. It knew what was happening. This part of
     me fought the skeleton, did not want to go into
     the street, didn't want to risk. But this was the
     bad part. Sex, perhaps? But was it really the bad
     part? For it seems that one of the reasons I had
     for dying was that of killing what was bad in me.
     What is bad is sex, but sex is the only force that
     can reunite my parts, give me unity, stick the flesh
     onto the skeleton. Dancing is also sex. It doesn't
     seem to be bad; it's what gives me life. But it
     lacks an essential factor and an indispensable
     catalyst       —
               God. How can God be brought into this
     mess? Where has God been all this time?
           The same happened with God             as with the skel-
         eton.     He was   originally within   me, grew with me,
     moved  with me. The skeleton then disappeared,
           had an external, metallic skeleton, with the
         and   I
     wings of a jeweled butterfly. I had to find support
     somewhere, and I got dry inside. I became en-
     cysted in the butterfly. Its wings were like those
     of a bat, and its joints made an unpleasant and
     unharmonious metallic crack-crack. It is the same
     with God. He came out of me. He became a re-
     mote god, killed by the sadism of a maid, who
     told me in fine detail how He was crucified,
     crowned with thorns. I cried as she told me, and
     as she was stimulated by my crying, she made
     even more vivid the descriptions of the perfora-
       Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious       157
tion of His side   and the tearing of the skin   in the
mouth of the Christ Child. (I don't know whether
it was due to my confusion or to the way in