It would not be possible to give a complete picture of
the patient's inner life and evolution without taking
considerably more space, but what has been presented
shows the progressive unfolding of insight brought
about by successive sessions and the nature of the
process that would eventually lead to a cure. The
action of harmaline here could very aptly be regarded
as "mind-manifesting" in that, like a developer on
photographic film, it successively made the patient
aware of her fear of destruction, her death wish be-
hind that fear, and the reasons for which she was
hating herself. One of these was sexual guilt deriving
from incestuous fantasies, but this, too, revealed itself
as a by-product of a very frustrating relationship with
her father, her need to win his love by all means, and
her unconscious surrender in the face of his jealousy
and possessiveness. More deeply lay her own hostiUty,
unsuspected by her but projected on crocodilian ag-
gressors and sustaining a basic feeling of personal
evilness.
    Amonth after the last session, I left the country, but
the patient continued a self-analytic process which led
her to ever-increasing clarity.       A
                                   year later. I received
a   letter   from which   I   quote the following paragraphs:
164                 The Healing Journey
      Four days ago   I went out and walked in the
  streets.   Why?   don't know. What happened?
                    I                              A
  beautiful day, and it was silly to stay at home. I
  wanted to go out and I did. That is all. Simple,
  wonderful, and absurd; after all the searching,
  suffering, theories, and associations.  A beautiful
  day, and no more. I went out with my daughter.
  This helped a lot. Holding the carriage gives me
  some security. Furthermore, I am concerned with
  her and not with phantoms. I am happy and afraid
  at the same time. I feel that I have acquired some-
  thing precious and fragile that can be spoiled or
  evaporate at any moment. It is like having a new
  tool and not knowing what to do with it. I have
  gone out every day, each time a bit farther. But
  the world already seems to me very small. And
  furthermore, it is not a matter of walking, walk-
  ing, and walking. I need some place to go. And
  now as I write, I don't know what that place
  might be.
     I have fulfilled all my projects. (Do you re-
  member? teaching, earning money to pay for my
  own study.) My marriage is still a wonder of
  non-communication. At this moment, John looks
  at me as one might look at a time bomb. When
  I told him that I was going out by myself, he
  congratulated me dryly and then warned me to be
  very careful, because I would develop other symp-
  toms. In truth, I have had another symptom for
               —
  some time a severe headache in half of my
  head. But this is very clear: I have it only when
  I suppress my anger. And I prefer the headaches
  to the phobia. I don't dare express my annoy-
  ances because I feel my temper is too violent.
     In spite of my symptom being over, I feel as
  needful of therapy as ever. Not only do I fear a
  relapse, but I am afraid of being normal (if any-
  body can ever be called that). Now I know that
  I can achieve what I want, for the barriers that I
  placed in my way have vanished. But I don't
  know what I want, and I am afraid of knowing. I
                                                                  a



          Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious            165
  suspect that it is something bad.       How
                                          exciting! (I
  notice that I am writing to myself.) I thought that
  I did want to do something bad, but as soon as
  I had the thought, the "bad" thing turned mto
  something funny, childish.
     This is turning into a written analytic session.
  A   frustrating one, too. I would like to tell you
  other things:          How
                        happy I am in spite of my
  doubts and fears, how well I feel in spite of oc-
  casional depressions, headaches, and stupid prob-
  lems, how close I felt to you when I went out the
  first   time   —   I   almost phoned you to   tell   you.

  Four more years have elapsed now, showing                   that
the patient's symptomatic improvement was not a
transient state. Her problems at the time of this letter
are still those evidenced in her harmaline sessions           —
difficulty in expressing her anger and a doubt of the
                                     —
goodness of her spontaneity ^but these seem but a
shadow of her repression of hostiUty and her guilt
feelings at earlier stages in her treatment. She even-
:ually experienced further improvement as she realized
that her inability to express anger was related to an
idealized image of herself as a "good," loving person,
and she had been enslaved to this image instead of
daring to be herself, whatever her present limitations,
rhe process of healing cannot be considered complete,
>ut she is now much closer to the nature of that
tiger which served her as a guide in the first harmaline
experience, spontaneous and powerful, graceful and
knowing in the mysteries of life. Her evolution shows
the distance and effort that can mediate between the
presentation of any archetype in fantasy and its em-
bodiment, between the harmony and beauty conceived
and experienced as a projection in a dreamlike se-
quence and that experienced in everyday life. Some
elaboration seems to He between the two, in order that
  given abstract insight obtained in the symbolic do-
nain may be recognized in the particulars of action,
JO that the "heaven" of a harmaline session may be
eventually translated into earthly terms.
1   66            The Healing Journey
The panorama     of session reports in this chapter should,
I feel, give a fair idea of the specific domain of experi-
ences that harmaline is instrumental in opening up. To
speak of archetypes is relevant, but this does not cover
the complete range of reactions to the drug. Some
of them, as case reports show, may be quite "personal."
But something links these "personal" experiences oi
reminiscence, fantasy, or insight with those of the
"mythical" type: instinct. The most frequent themes
                                                  —
appearing in the content of harmaline visions tigerj
             —
and Negroes are highly expressive images of the in-
stinctual, basic, and natural level of our existence, ii
both its aggressive and its sexual connotations. The
mythical type of vision is one in which the instinctua
forces are in order, and flow, we might say, in ac-
cordance with the cosmic design. The resulting picture
is one of beauty, for each element finds its place in the
whole, which is only enriched by conflict and destruc
tion.
    In the non-mythical types of visions, aggression an<
sex appear as questionable or disruptive, and this
understandably, is more likely to happen the mor
the individual brings himself and his personal life int(
the scenario of visions. Only a person who is free fron
fear and guilt can see in his own life and circumstance
the same glow of the myth of fairy tale, in whic
every object suggests a hidden significance and stand
in its own right like a jewel. To this end, the abstrac
myth of a remote hero is like a blueprint, a map;
it is like a medium that conveys a certain attitude ths