that I was seemg now.")
     WTith   MMDA,there is litfle mterest           m
                                               lookmg at
external objects in conflicting states, when physical
sensations, unages, or intense feelings dominate
                                                      the
picture, and where the Now is   all-important  Yet in the
peak experience of         MMDA,
                               all stimuli are  welcomed
as part of the Now, and in this case the
                                            experience of
looking at photographs is  also  one  of developing ways
                  Ibogaine: Fantasy   and Reality      191
of relating to others that are in accordance with the
ongoing state of mind. The     diflFerence with I^D here
lies in the realistic perception of others with     MMDA,
both in terms of less projective elements (no distor-
tions) and less bypassing of their circumstantial reality.
   With ibopaine, the situation is more comparable to
that of   MMDA,     where tiiere is increased insigiit and
emotional response, and occasional clues to the reliv-
ing of childhood events. I find directiveness to be more
accepted with ibogaine, and this permits manipulation
of the apperceptive phantoms whenever the experience
is not that of an unmasked self seeing others behind
their masks.
  The potential of ibogaine in working with imagery
and dreams may be seen from the following instances,
where both this and the use of photograplS are illus-
trated in detail.
   I shall begin this account from the point at which I
suggested to the patient (a thirty-six-year-old artist)
that we might work on a dream he had reported to me
the previous week. This was one in which he sat at
the table in his parents' home while they seemed to be
present in a distant comer of the room. He felt some-
thing between his teeth, which he started pullinp out
in the form of white threads, but gradually they be-
came little greenish creatures. At this poin^ he woke
up   horrified.
   In the session he sets out to re-experience the dream,
and it turns out that, after pulling out fibrous and
gelatinous threads and living things, nothing further
happens. Yet he feels that there is more to come out.
When instructed to become the threads and experience
the dream from that point of view, he soon feels that
he is turning into a white worm with dark hairs. The
worm then turns into another thread, half white and
half green, out of which grow feet and which develops
into a small, rodent-like green animal.
   At this point, he is again perceiving images in front
of him as in the dream and feels that he cannot iden-
tify with them. The rodent now becomes a duck with
a long beak, and then a heron. "Become that heron,"
I say at this point. "Feel what it is feeling."
1 92             The Healing Journey
 ^
   "I enter the bird," he reports. "I see wings at the
sides of that  head that is becoming mine; I begin tc
fly over the wide and tranquU sea. The sky is of pure
unclouded blue, and the sun sheds a white light along
the line of the horizon."
   This dreamlike sequence continues with his going
through the sun and finding a huge white sphere on the
other side of it. At this point, I suggest tiiat we ret
to the original dream.
   Again he pulls threads from his mouth. As he is
pulling out green ones, a whitish fluid begins to gusl
out, brushing away the little animals. He feels surprisedj
that there are so few of them and that they seem sc
harmless, so he thinks that there may be more of them
left.
   At this point, I see the subject open his mouth more
and more as he gradually sits more erect and stretches
his arms and hands as if to embrace something in front
of him. This is how he later describes this episode.
"The gushing fluid now wets the hand with which I
was trying to pick the little creatures out of my mouth,
and now I gradually extend the hand without avoiding
the wetting. The fluid becomes whiter and more abun-
dant. I stretch Mid I open my mouth further and
further. The milky torrent has strengtii and pressure*
I place my hands in it so that they may be washed."
(Given something he said about this washing at the
time of the experience, I associated the process to that
expressed in Hercules' cleaning the Augean stables
with the waters of tiie Alpheus and Peneus rivers.)
   "Let us wash Jacob, now," I suggested At this point,
Jacob visualized a naked body whose head he did not
see. He directed the flow of milky sap toward that
body, and it went throu^ it, washing the hollow of
the head, thougji, he was surprised to find, not his own
head, but his mother's. (In brief, this face appeared
to be a mask, which he removed to find his mother's
real face.) As he continued the washing, the mother
opened her eyes and began to rise. She left the earth
and floated higher and higher into a luminous area
above. "This was very strange to me," wrote tiie
patient later, "since I did not believe there was a
                    Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality                  193

heaven to        rise to."   At    this point in the experience,   he
noticed a diagonal discontinuity between the area where
the mother was and where he stood, on &e earth. This
was a transparent brownish-yellow plane, which he
perceived as endowed with visceral vitality and which
gradually evolved into a sphere. On this sphere, a
throne now appeared and on it sat the owner of the
earth. He was a domineering character. The subject
approached and became him. This seemed to us to be
a lo^cal ending, and the dream sequence did stop at
tills point. Yet there is no feeling that matches the ex-
plicit content of the fantasy. The subject later reported
that he was, in fact, surprised at feeling neither happy
nor sad.
    As    be seen, the subject went throu^ this fan-
          will
tasy once more about four hours later, and this time
the outcome was different. The success of this second
att^npt was probably prepared by the insights and feel-
ings stemming from the contemplation of family pho-
tographs.
   After looVing at a photograph of his parents in their
youth, he was impressed by one              m
                                     which they are seen
together after several years of marriage. **What a re-
markable change!" he wrote later in reference to this
part of the session. ^'Mother had become an mtensely
suffering and tortured being. The looks of both of
fhem are turned inward, and their expressions are very
sad. Father is tense, his lips pressed together. His nose
conveys violence. Hardheaded and irritable. What a
difference between this and the brilliance of his gftance
m  the 1910 photo!''
   After he had described his parents' expressions, I
suggested that he have them talk to each other. This
was very hard for hun, since, as he was now aware,
he felt tfiat he would be criticized by his mother for
his sharing his view of her with a stranger. Yet "Mother"
finally    spoke:
    "I   know     that this   is   a marriage of convenience^ yet
why      you so violent to me? Why do you shout and
         are
insult me?"
   **I must do that because I am very weak," said