the bully, the one who wanted to be the big man, were
hiding unacceptable weakness and much guilt. Much
of the weakness was that of wanting, needing, and
feeling afraid to expose his needfulness. And most of
his guilt was about sex. Most of the life history that
he had presented to me was the history of his sexual
life, and the theme had run through the whole of his
session. "How can I reconcile sex with the sun?" he
said now, feeling in the presence of two incompatible
worlds, one of pure spirit and the other of the flesh.
But his doubt did not last very long, his change in view
being reflected in the remark that followed: "But the
penis in erection also points toward the sun!" This
was not mere playing with words and ideas, but the
expression of a change in feelings toward sex, which
suddenly became clean and holy in the measure that
it, too, was aiming at the sun  —    just like the airplane in
the vision discussed before. The light was the ultimate
end or beginning of the sexual urge, and, this being
so, sex was itself luminous.
    I find this session interesting because of how it shows
a gradual transmutation of psychological energy, par-
alleled by the opening up of its tubelike channel. It
may be said that, in the beginning, the patient was
a closed tube and even wanted to be like that. At one
point, he pictured a tube stretching beyond his field
of vision and described it with a feeling of dissatisfac-
tion or discontifort at its lack of beginning or end. "A
tube, a tube, a tube, tube, tube ... It never ends!"
And then he commented that a tube with no limits is
nothing, I find this rejection of the tube's "beyond-
ness" noteworthy, because it is precisely a tube's end-
lessness and openness that seem characteristic of
ibogaine peak experiences. But this openness to the
rigid little ego is like death; it is "nothing." Therefore,
the assertive bully kept pushing his head against the
ceiling. The image tells us that the tube's closedness
and the man's rigid defensiveness were the same. The
tube's opening would be the smashing of the man's
head, and that would amount to his death. In f^ct, that
man eventually disappeared.
    So what first wanted to go through the tube was
222                   The Healing Journey
gorilla-like assertiveness,     and that could not go through.
The tube cannot be permeable             to a form of energy
which, after   all,   seeks separateness. In identifying with
this   phony image of      himself, the patient was prevent-
mg the flow of his life. But what is this life that wants
to flow? On several occasions, he saw tubes coming
from underground, or rising from a basement. At some
point, water flowed out from it             —
                                      ^not gushing, just
barely leaking. "Now, now, now!" he exclaimed in
great excitement. And then "Ouch, ouch, ouch!" The
image changed to that of somebody being crucified,
and then he could not remember any more. Not only
the underground but the context in which these images
are embedded suggest that it was "dark" instincts that
wanted out, for the rest of the visions are of muddy
ponds, crocodiles, Negroes. Then the transformation
occurred by which the darkness and animal life became
light  —and not only light, for the sun heats, convey-
ing great energy. In fact, it is the source of all energy
and life. The sun is, quite literally, the father of plants,
animals, and men, and the patient only had to be-
come a child to know this.
   The present example shows only an amplification
of   what we have seen        in   many   others.   When we   con-
sider, for instance, Gail's sight of the light         coming   in
through the window while she lay in her crib ("K
was God"), or how the experience of light followed
each contact of another patient with the animal forces
portrayed in her imagination, or how in Jacob's case
the threads-worms-animals commg out of his mouth
became the bird that flies toward the sun ^m all of   —
these instances       it   would seem     that the drive that   is

"embodied" in the animals (or the greedy baby) is
the same which, from a different point of view, comes
to be experienced as a flight toward the light and light
itself.
     And the shift in point of view is very much that of
"entering the tube": entering life and living it from in-
side rather than being an outside observer of its man-
ifestations; experiencing it as closely as it may be
experienced, identifying with its central axis, with its
inner core; becoming life rather than having it; reach-
                    Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality            223
ing a state where subject and object are the same, the
thinker and his thoughts, the feeler and his feelings,
body and mind. So the process of entering the tube is no
other than that of entering one^s experience, which is
the object of so many traditional forms of meditation.

  Thus have I heard. At one time the Blessed One
  was living among the Kurus, at Kammasadamma,
  a market town of the Kuru people.
     There the Blessed One addressed the monks
  thus: "Monks," and they replied to him "Vener-
  able Sir."    And
                  the Blessed One spoke as follows:
       "This  the sole way, monks, for the purifica-
               is
  tion of beings, for the overcoming of sorrow and
  lamentation, for the destroying of pain and grief,
  for reaching the right path, for the realization of
  Nirvana, namely for four Foundations of Mind-
  fulness.
       "What are the four? Herein (in his teaching)
  a    monkdwells practising body-contemplation on
  the body, ardent, clearly comprehending, and
  mindful, having overcome covetousness and grief
  concerning the world; he dwells practising feeling-
  contemplation on feelings, ardent, clearly compre-
  hending, and mindful, having overcome covetous-
  ness and grief concerning the world; he dwells
  practising mind-contemplation on the mind, ar-
  dent, clearly comprehending, and mindful, having
  overcome covetousness and grief concerning the
  world; he dwells practising mind-object-contem-
  plation on mind-objects, ardent, clearly compre-
  hending, and mindful, having overcome covetous-
  ness and grief concerning the world." ^

  The seeming paradox           is   that this process of attend-
ing to actuality (in body, feelings, or thoughts) ap-
pears as a downward movement, toward earthly exis-
ience, and yet within the earthliness of its forms is found

  ^   Maha-Satipatthana'Sutta: 'Twenty-second text of the col-
ection of Long Discourses of the Buddha," from Nyaponika
rhera, The Heart of Buddhist Meditation (London: Rider &
Co., n.d.).
                                                           !