a picture.   The   center of the figure depicts the
  rising sun.   The   light from the sun is drenching
  the sky in very rich yellow and orange glitter-
  ing rays. And there are three women standing
  in the center in white Grecian robes with myr-
  tle on their heads and with their arms uplifted,
   singing.   {Long   silence.)
Doctor.    Do you hear the song?
Patient.   Do I hear what?
Doctor.    The song from      the   women.
          seems to be one note that is sustained
Patient. It
  throughout eternity. It's a great choral voice
   that they are singing with, although there are
   only three of them.
Doctor. Do you feel what that song wants to say
   throughout eternity?
Patient. I'm listening to it. It has a familiar sound.
   It's the sound of high power wire vibrating with
   electrical impulses.   Ahigh, humming sound.
Doctor. I would suggest that you pay as much at-
   tention to the sound as you can. Enter the
   sound, become the sound. It may contain some-
   thing very important.
Patient. I think part of its function is to carry
   telephone messages. I almost heard some voices
   I could understand.
Doctor. You are hearing some voices?
Patient. I heard very indistinct voices.
Doctor. In the sound?
Patient. No, the sound continued. It is as if it had
   connected its circuit to a telephone switchboard
   so that an occasional call would come into it.
Doctor. There's always a hum?
Patient. It's a pulsating hum.
Doctor. {Inaudible on tape,)
Patient. It's much too high. {Choral music on
   record player in background.) {Long silence.)
   I see the heavens opening up. The clouds puU
   back and form a wide ring. And from the
   ground, floating upward, are women with one
   hand upraised, like somebody would hold up
   their hand to be helped up a ladder. And they
1   34                        The Healing Journey
         are floating slowly up toward the peak of the
         dome.  Two of them are elderly, but they like
         the feeling of floating upward in space to the
         point that they forget the reason for this phe-
         nomenon, and they start doing somersaults and
         laughing and giggling and playing, enjoying
         themselves instead of assuming a pose. There
         are other people waving goodbye. I still haven't
         heard the music. (Long silence.) I heard one
         of the voices, but I couldn't catch the complete
         sentence. The woman who was talking on the
         phone was a farmer's wife with an unpleasant
         voice.
     Doctor. There's still a hum? Like an electric wire?
     Patient. Or high speed.
     Doctor, High-speed what?
     Patient. I guess I am associating it with jet air-
         liners.
     Doctor. So it seems to suggest energy. Can you
       say anything else about the energy? How it
       feels? Aside from speed, are there any other
         associations?
     Patient.      Power.
     Doctor. Contained power?
     Patient. Yes, very definitely contained.
     Doctor. Inward? Like the essence of something?
        Something very essential, latent, potential?
     Patient. I can't say I am the power, because it is
        a limited power; it is only a utility.
     Doctor. How do you know?
     Patient. Well, the setting it appears in . .  tele-                   .


        phone poles with wires strung between them.
     Doctor. But it originally was a song of the three
         women.
     Patient. Yes,            it   was.
     Doctor.       The        lion     led   you        to       a very beautiful
         place.    While           listening to    it   .    .   .


     Patient.      It's   a    hymn,      really, that they are singing.
     Doctor. What words would you give to it to con-
        vey the feeling of this hymn?
     Patient. Praise God on the highest, or to the high-
         est.
        Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious      135

    I would probably not have picked the image of a
 sculptured lion as a starting point for a fantasy ex-
 ploration had I not become aware before this particu-
 lar session of the prominence of big cats in harmaline
 experience, in the lore of South American shamanism,
 and in mythology in general. The role of the Uon as
 a guide to a domain of sacredness is not peculiar to the
 episode quoted above, but is similar to the role that
 the jaguar plays in the Indians' visions and that tigers
 and snakes play in the visions of other subjects. Even
 the association between the lion and the sun, indicated
 in this sequence by its walking on the sun's picture
 and also by its golden color, is a replica of South
American mythology, in which the jaguar is regarded
 as the incarnation of solar energy.
    The development of the sequence and the discussion
may be seen as a gradual unfolding of an experience
of power, jSrst petrified in a sculpture, then emanating
from the image as color and the expression of the lion
as ready to atttack, later meeting the observer as a live
 animal, then a hungry animal, and finally perhaps
speaking to the subject through the ear rather than the
eye in the form of vibrating electrical impulses.
    Still, we are left with the feeling of a certain lack.
Rich as the episode may be in meanings or mythical
overtones, the subject remains a detached observer, un-
related to the events in the dreamlike sequence by feel-
ings that go beyond the aesthetic. The image of the
lion, like a seed developing into a tree, has displayed
its contents, but this is still bound up in visual sym-
bols, much like a work of art which lies open to us
but which, according to our state of mind, may either
shake the foundations of our being or leave us cold.
   It may have been noticed that many of my inter-
ventions were made to draw the subject's attention to
her own feelings—    of which the vision may be assumed
to be the external indication and substitute. Yet the
response to these questions usually came through the
medium of a symbol. Asked, for instance, how she
felt about the lion's color, she felt that she was touch-
ing the warm fur of a live animal. Asked about her
feelings about being in the company of such an ani-
136                  The Healing Journey
mal, she tried to understand its feelings and saw it en-
gage in movement (walking toward the jungle.) Asked
what she wanted from a lion, she -saw the children
climbing on its back. Her experience was projected
onto the screen of her fantasy, leaving her as a detached
and rather indifferent observer, and she had difficulty
in stepping into the action as a character.      A way to
re-own the experience of her unacknowledged lion
nature might have been to enact the lion, stepping into
its skin to feel how it felt. But she was reluctant to do
this and would not even go through the moves of pr^
tending to be the lion or speaking in the first person
as it (him) rather than than oi it. The subject's ten-
dency to project her experience into the medium of
symbolic forms was expressed in a trait of her fantasy
which also exemplified a typical defense mechanism
in harmaline sessions     —the abundance of art forms,
which made her fantasy the representation of repre-
sentations. The suggestive obelisk is merely granite,
though when she attended to it, it became a rocket;
the lion was a sculpture, a frieze in heraldic style; the
sun, a mosaic. The opposite of this would naturally
be an experience of interacting with beings perceived
as fully alive; one where aesthetic distance gives way to
some degree of forgetfulness of one's self as a person
lying on a couch and contemplating an illusion.
   The following is an example of this type of experi-
ence, which I have always seen to be followed by posi-
tive therapeutic results: