in the sense of facilitating an analytic process on the
unconscious obstacles to life.
   I think that this patient has made a good and im-
portant pomt in the distinction which he draws be-
tween the objectivity of 'Hhings as they are" and sub-
jectively tainted experience. Naturally, we cannot per-
ceive "tilings as they are," being restricted to the aware-
ness of our experiences, but ibeso terms point at the
contraposition between two ways of experiencing: one
in which the mind empties itself, so to speak, of pre-
conceptions and grasps reality "as it is," and another
in which the external world becomes a mirror for per-
sonal anticipations, expectations, and desires. Which
of these we may want to regard as "reality"—that of
things out there, as independent as possible of our be-
ing, or tiiat of our own constructs  —   ^may be a matter
of taste. The "objective" world may seem more sub-
stantial than a world of phantom-like mental images,
but it is not ours. And our phantoms, while we house
them, are what we are. And if this is non-being, so is
the condition of having a receptive void inside.
  A   decisive step in the imfolding of this patient's ex-
perience was, we may assume, his implicit decision to
"fly" toward the threatening father-figure, for it was
this that led him to the discovery of his own "inner"
father, his male component. The tfureat that the fantasy
conveys bespeaks a barrier built into the subject's
mental functioning, since he would have attained his
psychological integration long before, if it had not been
                Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality          201

for a reluctance to    open up to certain points of view
or feelings.   When   the barrier is too great, not even
direction can substitute for the person's incentive in
taking the symbolic leap into the threatening domain.
The images will fade away (as in the following illus-
tration), or the feeling content will slip out of them.
But an external push may at least show the impasse or
result in the conquest of a limited portion of firm
ground from the ocean of the unconscious. This push
may consist in a given direction, reassurance, a C2dl to
pay attention at a point where the unpleasantness of
a process could otherwise incite the subject to look
away. To some extent, this push is provided by the
mere presence of the therapist, which gives the patient
enough security to let go and contact certain domains
of his inner world. Sometimes an active interest on the
part of the therapist in what the patient is experienc-
ing supplements the latter's disinterest at a crucial
point and may rescue hhn from a vicious circle of self-
deprecation and psycholo^cal immobilization. While
the patient in this case felt ready to meet the fantasied
threat and was driven by the wisdom of his unconscious
to do so before waiting for any instructions, the fol-
lowing is a case where persistent directions were needed
to have the patient confront for increasing periods of
tune and familiarize herself with threatening imagery.
   This session, involving a thirty-nine-year-old woman,
started with an outburst of rage at her sister, who, she
felt, had not trusted, loved, or understood her. In a
 rimilar rage, she then turned on the other members of
her family and finally her husband (in her unagina-
tion), whom she reprimanded in a loud voice. At last,
she exclaimed, "I am free! What a relief I feel!" Next
came a **white light" phase followed by a scene of
panic at being confronted by a tribe of Negroes beat-
 ng drums. An over-controlled and over-"civilized"
person, she saw herself with long hair and a primitive
skirt, also beating a drum. Then this scene was inter-
rupted, and the "light scene" began again:


     A beam of light comes     toward   me   from above.
  It enters    throu^ the window    of a great belfry. I
202                    The Healing Journey
  see the sky beyond, intensely blue, with white
  clouds.      Now
                another ray of Hght comes from a
  high mountain, and as this ray of golden light ad-
  vances, the other one (from the belfry) disap-
  pears. It disappears completely, and a huge red-
  dish-orange-colored sun advances. It illuminates
  the desert and the room in which I am. Every-
  thing is gradually flooded with reddish light. The
  room gets warmer and extremely beaut&l. The
  sun embraces           me and   gives   me   its   light   and heat.
  I feel like walking, pacing about the room, and
  when I stand up I see that I am in a black place,
  like a pond of dark water. There is only a piece
  of land, where the doctor and myself are.
    How terrifyingi Next to us, as if emerging from
  the water, a horrible monster appears. It is like
  a crocodile split in halL Intensely green. Its eye,
  from the side, is that of a brilliant bluish parrot
  with a curved beak. And the crocodile's tail is not
  really a crocodile's, but black feathers. What ter-
  rifies   memost are its eyes and the electric-like
  movement with which        it jumps from one place to

  another.  Scarcely   have   I taken refuge when it ap-
  pears all  of a  sudden         m
                               a diflferent place. I scream
  and hear   the  doctor's voice    saying, "Face it. Don't
  be  afraid.  Let  yourself  be   attacked."  But my fear
  is greater than the wish to comply, and I cannot
  do so. I close my eyes and see it again appear
  and disappear, to reappear once more in a diiSEer-
  ent spot ^here—         —
                       ^there     —
                                 ^tac-tac-tac . . . and I
      cannot stand the      fear.                                .

        Now     I   am   at the crossing of      two paths
                                                 inside
                                                   side
      a huge cave. Two enormous animals    appear,
                                           green color.
      by side. They are of an intense pale
      They  are plant-like. They seem to be formed of
      some kind    of cactus. Their skin is granular. Dis-
      gustmg. I am unpressed, but not afraid. The doc-
      tor says, "Face them." I look at them attentively.
      One of them has a huge head like an elephant's
         slightly funny    —
                           and from its chest hang twisted
      plantlike formations. When it moves, they
                                                    quiver.

      I find   it   funny and disgusting.
              Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality               203

   "Imitate    it.   Be
                    that animal," the doctor says. I
 can see that I           be able to do so. I put my
                     will not
 legs together and try, but I do not succeed. I re-
 sist it, I don't want it, I cannot. I tremble. That
 is impossible. / ieel that he wants me to dance.
 Did he say so, or did I imagine that? I do not
 want to dance. I don't feel like it. He insists: "Be
 that trembling." I end up trying to obey. I lift my
 arms, surrendering to what may come. I start to
 tremble and I feel that my two arms are one
 flame, and they emit light. An energy that has
 come from above moves them, has put them to-
 gether, and now they turn and turn as if electri-
 fied, beyond my power to $top them           .   .My .


 arms bum. They are fire and continue to turn. I
 faU to the floor with my arms still reaching up,
  and gradually Aey begjn to slow down and de-
 scend, while an infinite peace starts to invade me.
 It is          silent peace
         a sweet,             . .   .


    I feel   an understanding without words that I
  did not know before. It is consciousness. Great
  and deeper than ever before. I understand many
  ineffable things. I have not known how to love.
  I have lived without living. I see my little mind,
  when separate, as a fragment of my I AM. Un-
  derstanding, consciousness        —
                                ^it is the same thing.

  There are no words, but understanding is infinite
  in that instant with no time.