He  told his alter ego, "No. I cannot bear you. You are
too heavy." Then he looked at the heater in the room
and            own'self once more
        felt his                            —
                                     not just his ordinary
self,   but his recently acquired sense of "I": "Knowing
that I listen, I do, I move, gives                me    an incredible
power."
   The issue became clear only after his arrival at
home. He searched for photographs of his grandfather,
and looking at them he felt again the same nausea
that he had experienced while thinking of the Nazi.
He saw his grandfather as dirty and lecherous. Then,
looking at the photograph of a youth with a swastika,
he later explained, "My face contorted, and I saw my-
self as on the day when I raped her." He felt a great
relief and then set out to understand what had hap-
pened to him. Had he raped somebody? He was quite
sure that physically he had not. Had he morally raped
somebody? Had he destroyed somebody? Then mem-
ories started flowing from his mind. The way he had
frightened his little brothers and enjoyed their fear,
the way he had kissed that Uttle girl ... These and
other recollections were the source, he now knew, of
that feeling of dirtiness and nausea. For all that he
was feeling toward his grandfather, he now felt toward
himself. He now saw that he had been using the Nazi
 and his grandfather as screens to protect his guilt
 upon, since he had been unable to take responsibility
for himself.
  In a note that he sent to me in the following days
he ends with these words:
  "I did these wrongs, and I must compensate for
them with good.
  "Here I am. /, with the responsibiUty for this /.
     "I take   it.   I fully   take responsibility for   my   /.   I take
 my responsibility."
    I think that this account is of interest not only for
 the light that it may shed on many other "past-life
 memories" obtained in hypnotic or mediumistic states,
 but in terms of an understanding of the effects of
 MDA, as is my concern in this chapter. As with hyp-
 nosis, the        MDA
                   state is favorable to hypermnesia and
 time regression, but it also appears to bring about the
66                   The Healing Journey
emergence of       false   memories ("screen memories") and
particularly the identification with them in what may be
seen as a state of temporary shift in identity. The
quality of these age regressions or shifts in identity is
more   often than not Aat of dissociation, in that the
ordinary personality tends to forget, deny, or feel an
incompatibility between        its   premises and values and the
validity of the events "recalled."
   Yet, paradoxically, the experience of I-hood or in-
dividualized selfhood that crowns a successful            MDA
experience is the very opposite of dissociation. It is
precisely a state of psycWc cohesion or unity, out of
which a person may say, as in the last example, "I
take responsibility for myself."
   The whole process, therefore, may be seen as one
of integration via dissociation, or, more teleologically,
one of dissociation in the service of integration. As in
hypnotic states, only by forgetting his ordinary identity
and pretending, so to say, that he is not there as a
witness, can the person allow himself to experience his
life from a different point of view, habitually sup-
pressed. But this temporary lie of "This is not myself'
is the way to the realization of the truth.
   Just as a shift in identity to a previous lifetime was,
in our last illustration, covering up (and indicating)
aspects of his real identity in this lifetime, we may
wonder whether this is not always the case with mem-
ories, however true they may be. For, in being con-
cerned with the past, we are most likely being con-
cerned with an indicator of our present. When our pa-
tient felt suddenly relieved of the heaviness that had set
in on him in going beyond his birth, this relief was his
 reaction now to a change taking place in his present
 condition. This change was expressed to his conscious-
 ness at that moment as the notion of having raped
 someone, which takes the place of a disgust toward
 his grandfather or his previous life conduct and per-
 sonality. Once his disgust is directed at his own ac-
tions,   he  not disgusted or overwhelmed any more,
              is
but relieved, for he can take responsibiUty, and his
crimes are not so great after all. More than that, we
may be right in assuming that it is not his past actions
                MDA,        the   Drug of Analysis             67

hat are so important, but his attitude at the moment.
11 his desire to atone for his sins, as he expresses it,
le is now leaving behind him the inclination that he
vas apparently condemning in his past actions, but
nost probably rejecting in his present self. This, which
ippears to be an acceptance of the past                m
                                               terms of a
>roject for the future, is really a change in motivations
>r  personality in the present.
     Thus theillusion of otherness can be the link to an
iwareness of selfhood, making the individual feel safe
n temporary irresponsibility until he can discover that
svhat he has hitherto rejected is bearable for him to
accept; and the illusion of an issue being in the past
:an lead to the discovery of its survival in the present.
[n a similar way, the content of a memory can be a
ie that leads to a truth. Our patient's pseudo-recol-
lection of a previous existence here leads to the re--
membering of his grandfather's personality, to that of
lis "having raped somebody,'' and finally to the spe-
cific events that he was not acknowledging and that
were the source of his disgust.              How
                                            much of the
"memories" recovered in other sessions is fact and how
much symbolic substitutes I cannot tell, but the present
case suggests a way in which we may look upon them.
One thing that is clear is that a "false" memory, though
factually wrong, is psychologically true. Consequentiy,
the acceptance of it is in some measure equivalent to
a coming to terms with the real events distorted into
it. Thus, in our last example, the "realization" that the