anything which would corroborate such feelings of
aloneness or make them understandable.
   On the whole, it can be said that the treatment with
MDA    led to the envisagmg of a panorama that was
not quite revealed. The patient was advised to attend
weekly group therapy meetings to achieve greater
awareness and expression of his feelings, and after three
months he took part in a group session with          MDA
which I summarize here:
   Early in this session, the patient, who sat next to
one of the girls of the group, had asked her whether
she wanted to be alone. When she nodded, he dropped
to the floor, where he lay on the cold tiles. The cold
led him to experience sensations known to him from
             —
some illness cold and vomiting, alone and helpless,
unable to ask for help, abandoned He said he under-
stood that it was a feeling of rejection that made him
feel nauseated, cold, and alone. He then went onto a
bed at one end of the room and gave in more and more
to this feeling.   He made    soft   moaning sounds which
became longer and louder      until they turned into insis-
tent howls. After about half     an hour of shouting,   this
became increasingly articulated. The first words were:
"NO! NO! NO!" Then some minutes later, it was "Not
mediocre! Not mediocre! Not mediocre!" And later
still, he threw back insults at an imagined accuser:

"Mediocre! Mediocre!" and then "Criminals! Assas-
sins!" for a long time. He started hitting the bed, and
later the wall, with his fists. In the process, he real-
ized that the real target of his anger was his father.
Then there were references to his teeth. "They fall by
themselves! Mommy, thy fall by themselves!" Inter-
spersed with "No! Nq! Daddy! Daddy!" He called on
his father for help as he was being forced into some-
thing by his mother and finally ended, softer, with the
repeated utterance, "I have no Daddy, I have no
Mommy."
   The process lasted some four hours, after which he
forgot everything. When witnesses informed him of
what they had heard, he was able to recall to some
extent what he had said or done, but not the situations
of the past that he was reacting to. This is what he
                                                         —
56                The Healing Journey
writes on the following day: "I think that the yelling
was for severial situations at the same time, in each of
                                     —
which I felt in a similar position ^not being able to
count on the protection and love of my parents, either
because they denied it to me, because they were not
at hand, or because I did not feel that they were close
enough or that they could help me. Such situations
could have been an experience at the dentist, being at-
tacked by the children at my first school, or some
illness during which I felt very badly and alone."
   I am not reporting on all the experiences of the
patient in the group, but it is interesting to note that
throughout the day he felt an intense desire to be
protected and caressed by other group members
along with an inabiUty to ask for it.
    Comparing the patient's first   MDA    session with the
second, it is obvious that on the second he was able
to recall and feel more (of his aloneness, frustration,
and need), but at the expense of subsequent amnesia.
In spite of the latter, I felt that the depth of the experi-
ence itself showed a relaxing of defenses and that this
one might constitute a bridge to a following session
in which his memories and feelings could be integrated
into his conscious life. This was supported by the pa-
tient's responses to the HPT two days after the ses-
sion. The change here was striking once more, and
along with the rejection of weakness, a new theme be-
came apparent, a type of critical, sardonic, and de-
tached expression which in at least one of the pictures
he associated with his father's.
    The next session took place one month after the
second and started out feverishly and with a lot of
yelling. He seemed to be going trough the same ex-
perience as in the previous session, but the situation
that inspired his feelings was different. This began to
unfold gradually as he gave in to his rage. "Your son
is a thief. Your son is a thief. Your son is a thief," he
                                —
wrote on the following days and after that, anger,
defense, hatred: "No! No! It is mine, I found it lying
on the floor! It is mine, mine, mine! I have not stolen
it! I have not stolen anything! I found it. Criminals!