sional one. The first raises the issue of the subject's
relating to his mother and then taking the place of his
father, but his life is still not in it; the challenge is not
accepted. In contrast to these rather indiflferent images,
those of the second dream are loaded with an instinc-
tual charge, for which the patient must take responsibi-
lity by making the unfolding scene the result of a real
decision. It is his doing. In particular, among the main
differences between the two scenes are the recognition
of a sexual element in the washing of the mothers face
with   tiie   milky sap, and the menacing attitude of the
father as      tiie subject approaches (in spite of which,
he does).
   I think that we may safely assume that the difference
between the first and second attempts was brought
about by the discussion of the photographs, since tibis
was the point at which the feelings titat dominate the
dream entered the patient's awareness and became
really felt. Here was his first intimation of his father's
supposed brutality, experienced from both his mother's
point of view (a victim) and from his father's (hostile
because of a feeling of rejection).
   With his own feeling of rejection now activated, with
a recognition of his own want in his father's wanting
his mother's love, and with his aggressivity somewhat
released, he was ready for the symbolic action that
signified and proved his acceptance of his instinctual
iMlity. With this action, he literally undid the repres-
sive process to which he had subjected himself since
childhood in face of his "mounmental" parents. Now
he is not split into a "father" and a "mother," frag-
ments of his personality which reject each other, but
he accepts his striving to be a man and sees himself
as a father with a wife and children in the external
world.
   It can be seen in retrospect that, in his previous posi-
tion of self-rejection, he was identifying with a para-
sitic mother-image and being this motiier who "ex-
cludes" the man (father and son) instead of living his
life from inside out. Laying out the attitudes of "f atiier"
and "mother" was the starting point for the process of
becoming one with his own feelings, regardless of the
198              The Healino Journey
historical reality of his parents.   For   this reason,       we
might say that the former process was in the nature
of an analytical phase which made the synthesis in the
dream sequence possible.
   I have stated elsewhere that therapy with ibogaine
is most suited to the exploration of the past, in
                                                      con-
trast with   MMDA,     which  is most   adequate  for  the
clarification of the present. This is true to such an ex-
tent that one mipht even sav that, in contrast with the
dictum of "I and Thou, Here and Now" ^that com-
                                               —
pressed description of Gestalt therapv that fits    MMDA
                —
therapy so well ^that of therapy with ibogaine is typi-
cally one of "He and She, There and Then." The rea-
son is easy to understand, for the effect of       MMDA
                                                      is

predominantly on the feelings,  whereas  the reaction to
ibogaine is noteworthy for its emphasis on symbols,
                                  —
and only by means of symbols conceptual or visual
—can we deal with a reality that is not present.
  There is a great difference between the domain of
past experience to which     MDA facilitates the access
                                                        |
                                                        ^^
and that which is   exposed   by  means of ibogaine.
Whereas with the former it is a matter of events heing
remembered, and perhaps reactions or feelings in the
face of such events, with ibogaine it is a world of
                                                    fan-
tasies that the person  meets. Parental  images  evoke^
by means of ibogaine probably correspond to the child's
conception of his parents, which still lies in the un-
conscious of the adult—but these do not necessanly
match the parents' reality. The therapeutic process
                                                    such
with ibogaine may be depicted as that of seeing
constructions for what thev are and being freed throu^
confrontation of them. With MDA, on the other hand,
it would seem that reminiscence
                                  of the true events is
                                                      the
the confrontation that can implicitly counteract
power of distorted images, since these   were  based   on
                                         could  not  face
the denial of a reality which the  child
 at the time.                         .    ,   .          i    j
                                                    colored
   This "seeing things as they are" rather than
                                 prejudice, can   also  des-
 by the bias of imagination or
 cribe the view of things  at the  time  of an  LSD    peak
 experience, but this usually applies to the present,
                                                        and
                           fantasy  resumes   its  post   as
 the sleepmg dragon     of
                  Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality        199

guardian of the path. The patient in our last illustration
had an   LSD experience of this kind eight months be-
fore the one with ibogaine, and some of his reflections
on the difference between the two drugs may be of
interest, because of the clearer light they shed on the
nature of the process described in the account above.
Speaking of LSD, he says:

     I   had the certainty of seeing the world as it is,
  for the       time; as it has been and will be, inde-
              first
  pendent of myself. Everything became conspicu-
  ous in its finest details and was a harmonious and
  intelligible part of a whole. I received it as if it
  were paradise and understood that I had lost it in
  the windings of my own non-being. I saw my
  parents for the first time as they were, beyond
  their own myths. I saw them as sad, defeated,
  abandoned to their separateness. The experience
  with LSD was of a visionary gazing with the eyes
  wide open, looking in wonder at the world for the
  first time, as it may be seen when free from the
  screen of fear.
     I felt    an urgent need to recover that world, for
  I intuitively  perceived that my happiness was
  there. I understood that I could achieve this only
  by working on myself in all honesty, with no fear
  or playing at hide-and-seek. Ibogaine, on the other
  hand, led me to look at myself, inwards, with eyes
  closed. Through an incessant supply of mental
  pictures projected on a sort of three-dimensional
  screen, it compelled me to meet the monsters of
  my inner world face to face, to stay with my fears
  to the very end, without the interruptions that
  often occur in dreams, and to fight my way be-
  yond the phony, illusory threats that I had
  erected in myself.
    In contrast with LSD, ibogaine made me see
                 —
  my parents ^the central characters of my phantas-
                      —
  magoric scene ^m accordance with the image in
  which they were imprisoned in my inner world:
  imposing monuments that covered the whole field
200               The Healing Journey                     ^
  of vision. Ibogaine, making it possible for me to
  confront these legendary giants, also led me to
  an area where open combat with them was pos-
  sible. I did fight, and realized that the path of
  freedom leads through the ruins of inner fears.

  One    aspect of the quotation is that the patient be-
lieves that the   LSD experience, by showing him the
goal, gave him the drive to fi^t his way through the
ibogaine experience and achieve his aims. LSD is like
a look out of a window into the open; ibogame is
more like an occasion to destroy the old building and         <




make room for a new one. It is more of a "work drug"          ]