But the admirable Helen had a happy thought
     She lost no time, but put something into the wine
     they were drinking, a drug potent against pain
     and quarrels and charged with forgetfulness of all
     trouble; whoever drank this mingled in the bowl,
     not one tear would he let fall the whole day long,
     not if mother and father should die, not if they
     should slay a brother or a dear son before his face
     and he should see it with his own eyes. That was
     one of the wonderful drugs which the noble
     Queen possessed, which was given her by Poly-
     damna the daughter of Thon, an Egyptian. For in
     that land the fruitful earth bears drugs in plenty,
     some good and some dangerous: and there every
     man is a physician and acquainted with such lore
     beyond  all mankind, for they       come      of the stock
     of Paieon the Healer, ^


     Whatthe therapeutic implications of such an episode
of transient serenity may be can be seen in the follow-
ing case of a twenty-eight-year-old patient who was
sent to me by another psychiatrist after six years of
only moderately successful treatment
   The patient's reason for consulting, now as in the
past,      was chronic    anxiety, insecurity in his relation-
ships with people,        and women in particular, and fre-
     1   Homer, The Odyssey, trans. W. H. D. Rouse (New York:
New       American Library, Mentor Books, 1971), 49.
             MMDA and the Eternal Now                77

quent bouts of depression. After an initial interview,
I asked the patient to write an account of his hfe,
as I frequently do, in view of both the value of such
psycholo^cal exercise and the interviewing time that
may    thus be saved. As he was leaving, I said, "If
nothing new comes up, come back when you have
finished with the writing. But if you really put your-
self into it, you may possibly not need me any more
by then." The man came back after four months with
a lengthy autobiography and reminded me of what I
had said, for the writing had indeed been one of the
major experielaces in his life and felt to him like a
new beginning. Reading it, I could understand that, for
seldom have I seen anyone so explicitly burdened by
his past, nor such a heroic act of confession, in which
the author struggled page after page to overcome his
sense of shame.
   Much of this autobiography, from childhood on-
ward, spoke of his sexual Ufe, and it ended with a
description of aspects of it in his present life which
were related to his generalized insecurity. On the one
hand, he was disturbed by the appeal which anal sexual
intercourse held for him and concerned with the
thought that women would regard this as a homo-
sexual trait. On the other hand, he Uked to stimulate
his own anus while masturbating and felt ashamed for
this aberration. When questioned about his own judg-
ment as to how homosexual he might be, he said that
he did not know of any homosexual inclination in
himself, but that he could not dismiss an "irrational"
fear that others would not see him as a truly masculine
person. Whether his anal eroticism betrayed a latent
homosexual trend he did not know, and he was fright-
 ened by the thought of it.
                                      MMDA,
    While awaiting the first effects of          the pa-
 tient felt uneasy and somewhat afraid of looking ridic-
 ulous, but to his own surprise, he gradually entered
 into the state of calm enjoyment which is typical of
 the more pleasant experiences vidth the drug: "Like
 not needing anything, like not wanting to move, even;
 Uke being tranquil in the deepest and most absolute
 sense, like being near the ocean, but even beyond; as
78                    The Healing Journey
      and death did not matter, and everything had
if life
meaning; everything had an explanation, and nobody
                                    —
had given it or asked for it ^like being simply a dot,
a drop of honey-pleasure radiating in a pleasurable
space.''
   After some time, the patient exclaimed, "But this is
heaven, and I expected hell! Can this be true? Or am
I deceiving myself? Right now, all my problems seem
to be imaginary ones. Can this be so?" I answered that
this was possible and that if his problems were really
the fruit of imagination it would be good to understand
this very clearly, so that he could remember it later.
So I suggested that he might compare his present state
of mind with his habitual state and try to grasp the
difference.
   The difference was obvious to him. What the drug
had done was to turn off the judgmental side of him
that we had exposed in the previous appointments, the
inner critic that would not let him live.
   I said that now he knew what life was like when his
"judge" was artificially put to sleep, but that he would
                 —
wake up again and tihien it would be the patient's
choice whether to put up with him or not. He agreed,
and I proceeded to confront him with his problems
and photographs of persons in his family, in order to fix
in his mind the views of his postponed, non-judgmental
self. In doing this, he realized even more clearly the
reality of his tendency to self-torture in his ordinary
life. As he later said, "I had an intuition of it long
ago in self-analysis. But now I see it more clearly than
ever, and it is not just a cause any more, but a char-
acter with all its attributes. And its importance in my
life              —
       and problems     I feel it   now   —
                                   ^has been enormous."
   This insight did bring about a difference during the
days following the session, for the patient no longer
identified as much with his self-punishing criticism, but
looked at it with some detachment, as if he had a life
(his own judgment) independent of both the accuser
and the victim.
   Looking at a diary from which the patient has kind-
ly permitted me to quote, it is possible to see that up
to four days after the intake of          MMDA
                                          there was an
               MMDA and the Eternal Now                 79