We were face to face, the serpent with its open
  mouth, menacing, trying to devour me, and my-
  self,   full   of curiosity, trying to enter it without
  being bitten.     The solution to the problem was in-
  stantaneous:   I had to get in very fast     —
                                              so fast
  that the serpent wouldn't be able to get me with
  its fangs. Idea and action were simultaneous. In a
  leap, I found myself inside the serpent. Of course,
  this was a black tunnel with elastic walls, and I
  saw nothing. (It seems the serpent had closed its
  mouth.) I felt a horrible fear of never being able
  to get out of it. But then I remembered that this
           Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious     137

  was a dream and        that I could at any time go
  through the walls    —                 —
                          open my eyes and find my-
  self in bed. Next, I considered that since I was
  already there, I should find out what the serpent
  contained, for I was absolutely sure that^ some-
  thing was in it. I was still afraid, so I decided to
  proceed as quickly as possible. I walked for a
  while toward the tail, and suddenly there was
  light. There was a grotto at the rear. It was sub-
  terranean grotto, inside of which was a lake. The
  water proceeded from a fountain and was very
  pure and fresh.      I felt   an imperative need to go
  into the water. I was very tired, and the water
  was going to enliven me and especially purify me.
  It also seemed that it was veay hot inside the
  snake, so the freshness of the water left me with
  an exquisite sensation. I entered the little lake
  wearing a white robe; I saw myself, for I was at
  the same time bathing and on the shore, looking
  at myself while I bathed. The "I" that watched
  had no body, but the one bathing felt very cold
  after the initial pleasant sensation. I therefore left
  the water; both of my "I"s became one, and I
  returned through the tunnel to the snake's mouth.
  I was afraid of being able to get out, but as I
  reached the spot the serpent opened its mouth,
                                  —
  and with incredible speed to avoid being bitten
  —  I found myself in my bed.


   This sequence is one of many in a session of great
therapeutic value, and it illustrates a trait common to
both. In every episode, the patient is the main charac-
ter of the story, and as things happen to her, she is
affected    by them. Not only does she     visualize herself
entering the serpent, but she identifies with her visual-
ized self and experiences her experiences to the extent
of forgetting that she is in her own bedroom having
a fantasy. She, the dreamer, feels curiosity, fear, and
delight, and finally feels that she has taken decisions,
surmounted obstacles, added something to her own
life. If we accept imagery as symbolic of unconscious

feelings and urges, we may regard experiences like the
138              The Healing Journey
one quoted above as interactions of a person with his
unconscious, and find in this the reason for their the-
rapeutic value. Moreover, it appears from the sessions
that every time confrontation with the unconscious
"other*' taies place, some integrative experience ensues
which is expressed in visual symbolism at the time (i.e.,
light and water of purification after facing the danger
of being destroyed).
   Several factors seem to be involved in making this
type of experience possible. Some individuals appear
to be naturally more prone to it than others, and the
personality factors involved in this remain to be eluci-
dated. I think that mental health is one of them, but
definitely not the only one. I also have the impression
that mesomorphic somatotonics are more likely to have
a rich experience than cerebrotonic ectomorphs.
   But beyond the question of individual diflferences,
training can prepare the ground for a fruitful harma-
line experience—   ^training in the observation of mental
events, as is provided by most forms of psychotherapy,
and particularly training in active imagination. Iliis
particular patient had both, having been prepared for
the session by a period of analysis and several guided
daydreams.
   In spite of the spontaneous unfolding of many
harmaUne experiences, such spontaniety most certainly
needs favorable conditions. TTiis was evidenced by the
unpleasant and unproductive sessions of two subjects
during the recording of electroencephalograms, as con-
trasted with productive and pleasant ones which they
had in the standard setting. Rapport with, and trust in,
the therapist also seem to play an important role,
since the persons with less meaningful experiences were,
on the whole, those who had communicated less dur-
ing the preparatory interviews.
   I believe that one of the most important functions
of a therapist in a harmaline session is that of hstening.
Persons who volunteered for experimentation witii
harmaline, regardless of their personal interest in this
venture, were instructed to report what they were ex-
periencing, so that even when they kept quiet, they
tried to keep a mental record of their reactions in view
        Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious      139

of making a report. I did some unsystematic experi-
mentation on the bearing of this attitude of intentional
watchfulness by not questioning the subjects at some
periods in their sessions, by walking into the next room
and telling them to spend the following half-hour as
they wished and not care about reporting this episode.
Also later, after the first thirty cases, I administered
harmaline to other subjects without the standard in-
struction stressing watchfulness, alertness, and the
prospect of a report. It is my impression that, under
these circumstances, less was remembered or less act-
ually took place in the person's mind    —  except in the
cases of persons who were left to themselves after hav-
ing arrived at what seemed to be a peak experience.
   Conversely, when a highly productive level has not
been reached, it seems that watchfulness will lead to
it more easily than passive surrender. This watchful-

ness may be sustained through communication. I es-
pecially ask the subjects not to overlook reporting their
physical sensations, since their doing so stresses a state
of alertness, which counters the natural tendency to be
carried along lethargically and forget the harmaline
 'dream," much as happens with nocturnal dreams. It
appears that the usefulness of harmaline is that of
bringing about an integration of the conscious and un-
conscious spheres by a facilitation of symbolic oneiric
processes in the wakeful state. If alertness slackens, un-
conscious life proceeds unconsciously as in natural
sleep or habitual "wakefulness."
   There are instances in which imagery or feelings
flow so meaningfully and spontaneously that little or
no "coaching" is needed. Other cases illustrate how
some guidance can lead the person to the point where
such productiveness is reached. In the following ex-
ample it was the guided daydream which channeled
the subject's creativity into tiie visual sequence. This
procedure proved most fruitful in several instances as
a framework in which the person's feelings could be
translated, manipulated, and eventually interpreted. I
have generally adhered to DesoiUe's basic scheme of
ascent, flight, and descent into the ocean, since this
lends itself well to the expression of some basic atti-
140                         The Healing Journey
tudes (effort and search, freedom, plun^ng into the
unknown)      and, like the standard pictures of a projec-
tive test, it can give the psychotherapist some orienta-
tion on the person's individuality as contrasted with
that of others in developing the common theme.
   The following is an account of a complete sequence.
The patient is a thirty-four-year-old man with marital
problems and an anxiety state of short duration.