three sessions, but because of the particular quality and
importance of these moments. This is the reminiscence
or re-enactment of early life events, which may set in
by association with the ongoing situation, with imag-
ery, photographs, or interpretations of the patient's
behavior.
  I    have already stated that what ibogaine typically
does    is to brin^ about the memory, not of external
events    (like   MDA),    but rather, of inner events or
fantasies.These may be chronic fantasies, like the
parental images, or may be more in the nature of
events in time. This may be seen in the case of a
middle-aged       woman who  at some point in her session
remembered    the  following:  Her father had come home
with gifts for all the family, and gave her brothers and
sisters what they had asked for beforehand. She had
only said, wanting to be the favorite daughter, "Don't
worry about me. Daddy; don't waste money on me."
In fact, he brought her something less valuable than
                          —
he had for her sisters a little brooch in the shape of
a dog. The story as told thus far was probably avail-
able to her conscious reminiscence, though she had
not thought abbut the incident since her childhood
days. What she discovered with surprise, though, was
that, frustrated and disappointed with the small gift,
she right then had a fantasy that the little dog (or she,
she could not tell) bit oflE her father's penis and ate it.
Moreover, she now realized that she felt guilty after-
ward, as if the unaginary event had actually taken
place, and that this guilt had permeated her relation-
ship with her father ever since. Those few seconds of
inner life had magically affected her whole life, put-
ting an end to the period of closeness to her father.
Instructed to imagine that she could talk to her fa-
ther now, she told him what had happened. "He"
understood, and again she could feel clean and free.
When she met her father in real life, she felt that she
could love him well again.
   This episode not oidy shows us how a mental event
can influence life as much as, or more than, a fact, but
is important in documenting that it is possible, after a

lifetime, to   remember a fantasy     th^t   was probably un-
212              The Healing Journey
conscious even at the time when it occurred. The]
nature of this particular fantasy seems to be very]
congruent with that of iboga imagery (the animal bit-
ing off and eating the genitals, the Oedipal situation)
m  general and the feelings (anger, resentment, frastra-j
tion) that it tends to elicit, so that we even feel
tempted to interpret this whole aspect of the "iboga
world" as a regressive manifestation. But this I can
only leave as a suggestion.
   Whereas, in the last illustration, the patient recog-
nized her fantasy as such, there are instances of ap-
parent reminiscence of an external reality where one
can suspect that a fantasy is being projected onto the
past as pseudo-memory, just as a hallucination is a
pseudo-perception of die present. Whenever I think
that this may be taking place, I deal with the memory
as if it were a piece of imagination, assuming that the
characters in it are projections of the patient's per-
sonality. I therefore ask hun to confront them or im-
personate them until their psychological reality in the
person's present state of mind can be discovered.
   Consider the following fragment of a session. The
patient (a young actress consulting because of marital
difficulties) was telling me of a dream in which she
was surprised to find that she had given birth to an elf.
This was a strong and healthy miniature man. When I
asked her to talk as he would, "he" said "You'll call
me Shawn. I am very intelligent. I am going to sing
and I am going to dance. I'll show you, I'U show you."
On repeating this in the elf s voice and remembering
hun physically, she realized that she had always been
wanting to show everyone that she was intelligent and
could do things. Then she noticed that the elf had
the body of her husband and that of a previous boy-
friend, and that she had been trying to live their lives
instead of her own. "I guess that I have always wanted
to be a boy," she said. "I never loved myself very
much."
   I suggested at this point that, just as an elf conveys
a feeling of strangeness and uniqueness, of not belong-
ing to the ordinary human world, perhaps she had felt
a comparable strangeness with regard to her parents.
               Ibogaine: Fantasy and Reality          213

This was evident to her. Her mother had looked upon
her as if she were a little monster and made her feel
like a strange creature. Part of her own feeling of being
from a diflEerent world she traced to the fact that her
parents hardly ever seemed to pick her up in their
arms, as if they were afraid of doing so or did not
know how. So I now suggested that she might try to
feel like a baby again and experience what she might
have felt at that time. For her, this felt like a very
realistic memory: "I went back to about one year,
perhaps more, in my crib. The baby bed had a kind of
railing around it, and I remembered my parents and
relived the scene as if it were here and now, with all
my emotions and movements, colors, li^ht of day,
everything. They were looking into the crib, waving
their hands and playfully saying, 'Gailie, Gailie.' They
didn't touch me, and I wanted them to. They looked
at me like something strange. I found that the elf
                                     —
had really been bom at that time ^in that I was on
exhibition and didn't feel like another human being. It
seems that love was the thing that was lacking there.
I was also in that baby bed, which was something like
a cage."
   Note the "imprisonment" theme in addition to the
feeling of frustration.While she told of these memo-
ries, she suffered. She continually felt that she was
very sick, not like other people, not loved. The most
mtense feeling of lack of love occurred while she was
thinking of her mother. She remembered her coming
into the room, shouting at her, and stamping her feet.
While she, the baby, cried and needed her, she said,
"Stop bothering me. Stop that crying and let me do
the dishes!" I asked her to talk like her, and she did,
imitating her voice and her inflections. This is how she
later remembered the following episode and her feel-
ings: