To my right there is a young couple. He is lean-
ing on a gigantic slice of melon, which supports
his back or on which he half-sits. She is firmly at-
tached to his chest. Their mouths are united in a
tight kiss. He caresses her breasts and sex at the
same time with his hands. Their faces look com-
placent. She enjoys his hands, and he enjoys her
pleasure.
  At once    imagine making love on a great slice
               I
of melon.     No
               doubt I have found the wetness I
was looking for. The wetness of a melon, of a
mouth, of a gigantic vagina. Why not enter? After
swimming      in fire I think that there are   many   things
that I could do.
   I enter into a dark cavity and touch its soft, wet
walls with my hands. I would say that the en-
closure caresses with an enveloping caress. I am
naked and feel the contact with my body.
   At the end, there is a spiral stairway which
leads through tubes to the ovaries. I start climb-
ing,   and     tremendous excitement at being on
             feel
the verge of  knowing the place where life begins!
I have arrived, and I find myself in a spacious hall
where the color white predominates. Behind a
table there is a young lady in a white cloak and
wearing eyeglasses. She looks very serious. I dis-
like her. She is cold.
   I ask her what she does, why she is there. I am
surprised to hear that she and a companion in a
similar hall are in charge of determining concep-
tions. I am aware of my own astounded express-
ion, but she does not notice. At my request, she
explains that people believe that conception is the
outcome of sexual intercourse. But such inter-
course is just an act of love, she says, and she is
in charge of controlling conception.
  I inquire about the criterion or policy in such
decision-making, and she tells me that all con-
ceptions are registered in a big book, which is
something like a book of life.
  I draw close to see it. It is extremely old, some^
what like an old Bible, with a pecuUar binding.
144                  The Healing Journey
     The book indicates all births, with nine-month
     waiting period. It is not complete, but ends in
     1892. The rest is blank pages. The last sentence
     is: "And the day will come when man, with the
     help of science and technology, will become his
     own creator."
        The place displeases me, and I decide to         leave.
     I try to descend the way I came up, by the           spiral
     staircase, but I   do   it   through a narrow tube,   fall-
     ing at last in a giant       womb.   I   bounce against   its

     walls,   which look     like rubber.
        As my sight gets used to the dark I see big
     erosions in the walls, half-healed gouges that have
     been left by a huge curette. I feel that I am wit-
     nessing the register of all the children who were
     not bom.

     One thing that can be noticed in this fantasy       as    —
in   most   —
            is that many events in it would not have

taken place were it not for a specific direction to this
effect. Furthermore, the most significant episodes gene-
rally unfold only after meeting some resistance. Where
the dreamer would, left to himself, interrupt a sequence,
follow the most pleasant aspect of his imagination, or
be distracted, the therapist can press him to enter the
burning sea, to dive in spite of his initial lack of inter-
est, to meet the monsters, to knock at the door, all of
which involves increased interaction between his every-
day "I" and his other self, between his usual center of
consciousness and the symbolic presentation of his un-
conscious processes. In the case of this man, the dream
leads to an increasing expression of an urge for all that
he symbolizes as "wetness": sensuousness, sex, earthi-
ness, woman, love.      A
                       peak is reached in the expression
of this theme with the fantasy of entering the womb,
after which a sudden change takes place from "wet-
ness" to frustrating "dryness."
   I would advance the hypothesis that fantasies of the
wish-fulfillment type express the fact that a person is
accepting his own impulses, whereas self-defeating fan-
tasies are the expression of self-rejection in the form
of repression. In other words, the pleasure which gener-
       Harmaline and the Collective Unconscious      145