symbols may be as relevant to the therapeutic process
in this as in other points. Hell is a state of helplessness
and hopeless suffering; purgatory is one of chosen suf-
fering for the sake of a goal. In the first, man is a
victim; in the second, a penitent In hell, man merely
contemplates his reality, being, so to say, flooded by
the evidence of his awfulness. Purgatory begins when
open-eyed vigilance is not threatening any more, but it
is still a challenge to act. This is the beginning of the
via activa, in contrast to the via contemplativa, and
the pams of purgatory are in the nature of the fric-
tion between a being's expression and the ingrained
hindrances of his personality. It is a confrontation of
that which can only be confronted or brougjht into
awareness through the challenge of moving against it
In Dante's imagery it is the climbing of a mountain. In
psychological terms, it is the courage to be, to express
one's essential nature in spite of opposition. In the
psychotherapeutic context, and particiilarly in that in-
volving psychoactive drugs, action usually proceeds in
the very limited social context of the relationship with
the psychotherapist, but can be extended into the ab-
stract media of art or the potentially unlimited domain
of imaginative representation. The importance of ac-
tion carried out in the medium of visual imagery or
 dramatic representation accounts for the stress given
 to the techniques of Gestalt therapy and of the goided
 daydream in the cases to be presented througjiout this
book.
        It      obvious that the process of inner change
             may seem
should begin with the inevitably painful contemplation
of those aspects in the present distorted psychological
reality that are to be transformed. Yet there is much
to be said of a complementary approach in psycho-
therapy—that of promoting the growth and expression
                                                           3

          The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy   1

of the healthy aspects of personality rather than the
destruction of the old patterns, the development of a
firmer grasp on reality rather than the analysis of the
phantom world of questionable pictures and interpre-
tations of existence. In the domain of drug therapy,
this becomes the issue of utilizing the peak experiences.
   Among psychotherapists using LSD and similar
drugs, it seems clear that there has been a tendency
for some to seek one-sidedly the elicitation of peak
experiences and to consider iht ''bad trip" as an acci-
dent that they do not take as a challenge to work
through. On tiie other hand, there are ^ose who are
skilled in handling pathological manifestations and
conflicts but feel at a loss in the face of blissful epi-
sodes that have no place in their conceptual frame-
work.
   If both the agony and the ecstasy of drug experi-
ences have a potential for psychological healing, it is
important for us to know tiie place and promise of
each in the treatment of an individual and the best
way to deal with each when it occurs in the course of
a session.
   Technical as the issue seems, I think that the ques-
tion as to how these two types of experience are re-
lated is only a particular instance of a more encom-
passing one on the relationship of psychotherapy as
we know it to die spiritual disciplines and the spiritual
quest as described by mystical writers or teachers.
   When it comes to the understanding of drug experi-
ences, the attitudes or beliefs about the relationship
between psychotherapy and the spkitual quest vary as
much as when human experience at large is the issue.
The most widespread tendency, though, is to see them
as unrelated, either one or the other being all-impor-
tant Thus, there are those who stress the "transcen-
dental" side and regard psychotherapy as a rather
trivial matter and those who either look on everything
"mystical" with suspicion or see it as of cultural inter-
est though irrelevant to the higjher goal of healing the
mind. Psychotherapists who see the relevance of spir-
itual disciplines to their field of endeavor (like Fromm,
Benoit, or NicoU) or religious thinkers interested in
14               The Healing Journey
psychotherapy (like Watts) arc a minority, and their
number diminishes when we look for those who have
definite notions as to how the ideas and procedures of
these different domains are related, and not just divided
interest.
    In my own view, "psychotherapy" (rightly under-
stood) and "mysticism" or "esotericism" (rightly un-
derstood) are but different stages in a single journey
of the soul, different levels in a continuous process of
consciousness expansion, integration, self-realization.
The central issues of both are the same, though the
phenomena encountered, psychological states dealt
with, and techniques appropriate to them may differ.
Some of these issues, as I have detailed elsewhere, are,
aside from the growth of consciousness, that of con-
tact with reality, the resolution of conflicts into ever
more encompassing wholes, the development of free-
dom and the capacity to surrender to life, the accep-
tance of experience, and, most particularly, a shift in
identity leading from the enactment of a self-concept
to the identification with the real self or essence.
   The relationship between the quests for sanity and
enlightenment might be seen as that between the mi-
nor and the major mysteries of antiquity. While the
former aims at the restoration of "true man," "orig-
inal man," the goal of the latter was the transcendence
of the human condition, the acquisition of some degree
erf freedom from the needs or laws that determine or-

dinary human life by assimilation to a radically dif-
ferent state of being. The gap between strictly human
consciousness, even at its fullest manifestation, and
this "other shore" is at the root of symbols such as
that of a bridge or ocean to cross or a ladder to climb
(not merely an earthly mountain), and, particularly,
those of death and rebirth, which may be found in all
mystical and religious traditions.
    "Original man," "natural man," is the goal of psy-
chotherapy. This is man freed from "origmal sin,"
man that does not turn against himself but fulfills his
potential in afltonation of himself and existence. Such
is the man that Dante, in his monumental synthesis of
the culture of antiquity and Christianity, places at the
        The Healing Potential of Agony and Ecstasy        15

summit of purgatory: earthly paradise. Paradise, yes,
butstill not heaven, for this lies beyond the sub-lunar